b encyclop xc x dia britannica start your free trial log in xc xb join spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies start your free trial search britannica what are you looking for search click here to search browse popular topics jonestown massacre apollo martin luther roe v. wade history of technology bring fact checked results to the top of your browser search. learn more. flag of turkey written by whitney smith see article history before article national flag consisting of a red field background with a central white star and crescent . the flag has a width to length ratio of approximately to . various myths are associated with the symbolism of the red colour and the star and crescent but none really explains their origins. although the star and crescent are often seen as typical muslim symbols in fact they have a history long predating the rise of islam. ancient civilizations throughout the middle east used a crescent moon as a religious symbol and the ancient city of byzantium was dedicated to the moon goddess diana . a star emblematic of the virgin mary was added to diana xe x x s crescent symbol when emperor constantine i made christianity the official faith of the roman empire and renamed the city constantinople in his own honour. the crescent and star became associated with islam when the muslim turkic peoples of central asia captured the anatolian peninsula and eventually constantinople and added the crescent and star of the latter to their own plain red flags. there were several turkish flags throughout the centuries of the ottoman empire most of them incorporating the crescent and star and the colours red or green. in june the flag now used as the turkish national flag was established for the navy although its star had eight points instead of the current five. the reduction in the number of star points was made about . that flag design was reconfirmed as the turkish national banner on june following the revolution led by atat xc xbcrk who had established a republic in after the collapse of the ottoman dynasty. p whitney smith end of content learn more in these related britannica articles turkey turkey country that occupies a unique geographic position lying partly in asia and partly in europe. throughout its history it has acted as both a barrier and a bridge between the two continents. turkey is situated at xe x xa crescent crescent political military and religious emblem of the byzantine and turkish empires and later and more generally of all isl xc x mic countries. the moon in its first quarter was a religious symbol from earliest times and figured for xe x xa diana diana in roman religion goddess of wild animals and the hunt identified with the greek goddess artemis. her name is akin to the latin words dium xe x x csky xe x x d and dius xe x x cdaylight xe x x d . like her greek counterpart she was also a goddess of domestic animals. as a fertility deity she was invoked by xe x xa constantine i constantine i the first roman emperor to profess christianity. he not only initiated the evolution of the empire into xe x xa turkic peoples turkic peoples any of various peoples whose members speak languages belonging to the turkic subfamily of the altaic family of languages. they are historically and linguistically connected with the tujue the name given by the chinese to the nomadic people who in the th century ce founded an empire stretching xe x xa additional media article history article contributors related topics turkey flag ad similar topics flag of the united states of america flag of nepal flag of india flag of canada flag of australia flag of germany flag of france flag of new zealand flag of italy flag of mexico ad edit mode flag of turkey tips for editing leave edit mode submit tips for editing we welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. you can make it easier for us to review and hopefully publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. encyclop xc xa dia britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. you may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. any text you add should be original not copied from other sources. at the bottom of the article feel free to list any sources that support your changes so that we can fully understand their context. internet urls are the best. your contribution may be further edited by our staff and its publication is subject to our final approval. unfortunately our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. submit thank you for your contribution our editors will review what you ve submitted and if it meets our criteria we ll add it to the article. please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. uh oh there was a problem with your submission. please try again later. close keep exploring britannica united states united states country in north america a federal republic of states. besides the conterminous xe x xa read this article united kingdom united kingdom island country located off the northwestern coast of mainland europe. the united kingdom xe x xa read this article russia russia country that stretches over a vast expanse of eastern europe and northern asia. once the preeminent xe x xa read this article view more stay connected facebook twitter youtube instagram pinterest newsletters about us about our ads partner program contact us privacy policy terms of use xc xa encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. menu home spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies login join flag of turkey view all media image media print cite share share facebook twitter google linkedin email share share share facebook twitter google linkedin email search email this page email to email from subject comments cancel send xc x close download our free chrome extension britannica insights . facts matter and britannica insights makes it easier to find them. install for chrome now learn more