b encyclop xc x dia britannica start your free trial log in xc xb join spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies start your free trial search britannica what are you looking for search click here to search browse popular topics jonestown massacre apollo martin luther roe v. wade history of technology bring fact checked results to the top of your browser search. learn more. flag of turkey written by whitney smith see article history before article national flag consisting of a red field background with a central white star and crescent . the flag has a width to length ratio of approximately to . various myths are associated with the symbolism of the red colour and the star and crescent but none really explains their origins. although the star and crescent are often seen as typical muslim symbols in fact they have a history long predating the rise of islam. ancient civilizations throughout the middle east used a crescent moon as a religious symbol and the ancient city of byzantium was dedicated to the moon goddess diana . a star emblematic of the virgin mary was added to diana xe x x s crescent symbol when emperor constantine i made christianity the official faith of the roman empire and renamed the city constantinople in his own honour. the crescent and star became associated with islam when the muslim turkic peoples of central asia captured the anatolian peninsula and eventually constantinople and added the crescent and star of the latter to their own plain red flags. there were several turkish flags throughout the centuries of the ottoman empire most of them incorporating the crescent and star and the colours red or green. in june the flag now used as the turkish national flag was established for the navy although its star had eight points instead of the current five. the reduction in the number of star points was made about . that flag design was reconfirmed as the turkish national banner on june following the revolution led by atat xc xbcrk who had established a republic in after the collapse of the ottoman dynasty. p whitney smith end of content learn more in these related britannica articles turkey turkey country that occupies a unique geographic position lying partly in asia and partly in europe. throughout its history it has acted as both a barrier and a bridge between the two continents. turkey is situated at xe x xa crescent crescent political military and religious emblem of the byzantine and turkish empires and later and more generally of all isl xc x mic countries. the moon in its first quarter was a religious symbol from earliest times and figured for xe x xa diana diana in roman religion goddess of wild animals and the hunt identified with the greek goddess artemis. her name is akin to the latin words dium xe x x csky xe x x d and dius xe x x cdaylight xe x x d . like her greek counterpart she was also a goddess of domestic animals. as a fertility deity she was invoked by xe x xa constantine i constantine i the first roman emperor to profess christianity. he not only initiated the evolution of the empire into xe x xa turkic peoples turkic peoples any of various peoples whose members speak languages belonging to the turkic subfamily of the altaic family of languages. they are historically and linguistically connected with the tujue the name given by the chinese to the nomadic people who in the th century ce founded an empire stretching xe x xa additional media article history article contributors related topics turkey flag ad similar topics flag of the united states of america flag of nepal flag of india flag of canada flag of australia flag of germany flag of france flag of new zealand flag of italy flag of mexico ad edit mode flag of turkey tips for editing leave edit mode submit tips for editing we welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. you can make it easier for us to review and hopefully publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. encyclop xc xa dia britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. you may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. any text you add should be original not copied from other sources. at the bottom of the article feel free to list any sources that support your changes so that we can fully understand their context. internet urls are the best. your contribution may be further edited by our staff and its publication is subject to our final approval. unfortunately our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. submit thank you for your contribution our editors will review what you ve submitted and if it meets our criteria we ll add it to the article. please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. uh oh there was a problem with your submission. please try again later. close keep exploring britannica united states united states country in north america a federal republic of states. besides the conterminous xe x xa read this article united kingdom united kingdom island country located off the northwestern coast of mainland europe. the united kingdom xe x xa read this article russia russia country that stretches over a vast expanse of eastern europe and northern asia. once the preeminent xe x xa read this article view more stay connected facebook twitter youtube instagram pinterest newsletters about us about our ads partner program contact us privacy policy terms of use xc xa encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. menu home spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies login join flag of turkey view all media image media print cite share share facebook twitter google linkedin email share share share facebook twitter google linkedin email search email this page email to email from subject comments cancel send xc x close download our free chrome extension britannica insights . facts matter and britannica insights makes it easier to find them. install for chrome now learn more b header starts here header maps of world current credible consistent logo header closed menu search maps xc xbb world maps xc xbb political map of the world physical map of the world blank world map world map for kids earth map world atlas world time zones map different languages map xc xbb spanish map deutsch karte russian map french map chinese map italian map indonesian map mapa do mundo continents xc xbb north america south america europe map asia map africa map oceania map antarctica map country maps xc xbb us map canada map united kingdom map france map russia map australia map germany map mexico map italy map ireland map syria map city maps xc xbb cities in north america xc xbb new york city map washington dc map los angeles map toronto map mexico city map chicago map san francisco map boston map cities in europe xc xbb london map rome map barcelona map paris map amsterdam map dublin map istanbul map berlin map cities in australia xc xbb sydney map melbourne map map of brisbane canberra map adelaide map darwin map perth map newcastle map cities in south america xc xbb salvador map rio de janeiro map sao paulo map bogota map santiago map lima map buenos aires map caracas map cities in asia xc xbb tokyo map delhi map beijing map bangkok map hong kong city map dubai map moscow map jakarta map cities in africa xc xbb cape town map accra map nairobi map cairo map tunis map alexandria map algiers map harare map thematic maps xc xbb demography maps xc xbb world religion map world illiteracy map world language map world happiest countries world life expectancy world top xc xbb richest countries in the world most powerful countries countries with largest army poorest countries in the world largest countries in the world largest cities in the world lat long maps xc xbb latitude and longitude map asia lat long africa lat long europe lat long australia lat long north america lat long south america lat long economy maps xc xbb world food consumption world energy balance map world economic classification world gdp per capita map world export map environment maps xc xbb world ocean map world river map world desert map major earthquakes world seaports map world natural vegetation world freshwater map world natural forest world soil map forestry distribution map history maps xc xbb world war i map world war ii map europe history map map of europe before ww other thematic maps xc xbb types of governments zika virus affected countries world air routes map world mineral map thematic map in german travel xc xbb wonders of world world travel destinations top beaches famous museums in the world top national parks world air routes map been there done that tools xc xbb driving directions and maps world air distance locator countries and capitals airport finder embassy finder us zip codes finder us area codes top universities in usa distance between cities postal code finder telephone area codes currency converter national independence days resources xc xbb around the world world flags calendar events infographics videos gis services custom maps list of world trivia world sports usa xc xbb states in usa counties in usa cities in usa usa flag us zip codes us highways us airports usa location map us national parks usa lat long map world map hd menu closed brdcrumb search brdcrumb closed h tweet h tweet world map country profile turkey h tweet closed header ends here left panel starts here link mow top lu link what s new ads link unit ads link unit country profile japan philippines pakistan china india iran iraq israel lebanon malaysia south korea singapore united arab emirates afghanistan azerbaijan bahrain bangladesh bhutan brunei cambodia north korea east timor vietnam yemen hong kong indonesia jordan kazakhstan kuwait kyrgyzstan laos macao maldives mongolia myanmar nepal oman qatar saudi arabia sri lanka svalbrad and jan mayen islands syria taiwan tajikistan thailand turkey turkmenistan uzbekistan asian countries information african countries information oceania countries information european countries information north american countries information south american countries information online quiz link ads div tan ads div left navigation panel ends turkey mow ad unit remove below h ad unit from entire mow heading new large ends content start full name republic of turkey. capital city ankara. language turkish arabic kurdish and laz. currency new turkish lira. religion muslim sunni . national anthem istiklal marsi . newspaper zaman yerel haber gazetesi xc x zg xc xbcr kocaeli aksam gazetesi alanya bote and ay gazete. places to visit safranbolu ruins of troy lavish ornamental mosques istanbul and remnants of the ottoman empire in short the whole country. transport airways international airports at istanbul ankara izmir. turkish airlines conducts direct flights from istanbul to over three dozen cities in europe alone and also many more worldwide railways daily services are available from the bosfor ekspresi between budapest bucharest belgrade and sofia to istanbul. also the dostluk ekspresi connects istanbul and thessaloniki roadways turkish bus lines ply between frankfurt and vienna waterways ferry cars services marmara lines ply between turkey s aegean coast and the greek islands. shopping handicrafts paintings rugs and carpets crystal ware hand painted ceramics and porcelain kilims laces leather and textile products canvas embroidery silver and gold jewellery with precious stones colour print cotton scarves ottoman engravings copper and brass wares silverware marble sculptures needlework and ceramics tiles. the eurasian nation of turkey is a constitutional secular democratic republic . the turkish version of its name t xc xbcrkiye is derived from the amalgamation of two words t xc xbcrk and the suffix iye . the former simply means strong while the suffix is possessive in nature and pertains to being an owner . the nation of turkey was concretely established by mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk in subsequently to ottoman decline. the part of the country that lies in asia is called anatolia while the european section is called thrace. turkey is a trans continental nation half of it being in asia and another half in europe. so it can be called a eurasian country. turkey has a diverse landscape of coasts mountains plains and peninsulas. the anatolian peninsula is almost a national trademark with its stark ruggedness and aridity it rises to a plateau surrounded by contracted coastal plains. the country of turkey is comprises of seven sections based on the region it surrounds or the region that surrounds it. they are the aegean region the marmara region the mediterranean region east anatolia central anatolia southeast anatolia and the black sea region. there are mountain ranges in the east that are the birth places for many a river namely the euphrates tigris araks and also lake van. the highest point in turkey is mount arat. where is turkey the land of turkey lies spread out across the southern region of two continents east of europe and west of asia. as a result it also covers two significant landscapes the anatolian peninsula and the balkans. its immediate political and watery neighbors are clockwise from the west armenia iran and azerbaijan to the east iraq and syria to southeast the mediterranean sea to the south the aegean sea to the southwest the sea of marmara and the country of greece to the west bulgaria to the northwest and the black sea to the north. climate of turkey turkey has clement weather almost the whole year round. it can be summed up in the phrase mediterranean . summers are hot and dry while the winters are wet and cold. however inland wards the conditions get arid and continental with demarcated seasonal changes due to the mountainous barrier near the coast. precipitation in the form of snowfall is experienced inland at higher altitudes. the month of may experiences the most rainfall. flora and fauna of turkey a country of rich diversity turkey has a huge inventory of plants and animals thriving in the country. this rich biodiversity includes trees flowers mammals reptiles amphibians birds and fishes. to begin with the kind of plants that populate the country of turkmenistan some of the wide spread species include the alder beech scots pine oak oriental spruce maple flax plums apricots hazelnuts figs almonds and sour cherries. among flowers those that populate the list are violets daisies poppies crocuses and sunflowers. as a direct result of all the flowers that are to be seen butterflies too are aplenty. animal fauna is just as diverse with some unique and rare species living in the land. some of these are anatolia leopard wild sheep tiger lions fallow deer the rare species are the kangal dog and the van cat a cat with one blue and one green. avian fauna in turkey consists of pheasant storks dalmatian pelican pygmy cormorants the slender billed curlew bald ibis flamingoes wild ducks and geese. there are some other species of fauna like the loggerhead turtles chelonia mydas and caretta caretta sea turtles and monk seals which are not just singular but also rare to spot anywhere across the globe. people of turkey the majority of the people of turkey are original inhabitants of the land. however there are people of other ethnicities too to be found. all these people have attained citizenship of turkey through the treaty of lausanne. some of the other ethnic races are greeks armenians jews abkhazians syriacs albanians arabs roma bosniaks pomaks chechens ossetians circassians levantines kabardin georgians laz hamshenis zazas and the kurds. mow ad unit mow ad unit arts culture and music of turkey art the indigenous arts in turkey though influenced can be clearly seen in their kilim works traditional anatolian jewellery carpet weaving canakkale ceramic ware hand made dolls matting metal bead works called g xc xbcherse tiles ceramics making of aydin needle lace of onyx sculptures hand crafted filigree silver ware and traditional yatagan swords . culture the dominant traits of turkey s culture are derived primarily from ottoman islamic and christian european influences. one of the chief markers of turkey s culture is its cuisine. turkey s cuisine has all the traits of nations that fell under the ottoman empire. so there are as many asian flavors to be deciphered as there are european. music the music of turkey is a commingling of influences from the arabic classical persian balkan ancient byzantine central asian folk and modern european. among the other influences in their folk music elements and traits pertaining to armenians greeks kurdish polish azeri and jewish can be detected. turkey flag turkey has a flag that is both simple yet bold. it consists of a stark blood red backdrop and on it in the center left of the flag is superimposed a white crescent moon and in the center a white five point star. the color red is reminiscent of the fallen ottoman empire while the moon and the star is an islamic insignia. economy of turkey turkey s economy is dependent on a two different aspects of its country s heritage. while the time honored agricultural segment is a major contributor so are the new industrial sectors of banking transport and communications. together they take turkey s economy the strength it possesses. the agricultural produce that is of utmost value is tobacco sugar beets cotton olives pulse grain and citrus. other industries which have export value include textiles processing and packaging of food transport equipment electronic goods mining of coal chromites copper boron and iron ore steel petroleum construction and construction materials lumber and paper. aside of all these commodities tourism is another flourishing revenue earner. content end tan mow admeld mow admeld main rightpanel ends footer starts here xef xbb xbf popup ad start mow popunder popup ad end new ad code new ad code mobile direct add code start mow x mobile mobile direct add code end start gutter space ad mow left nd ad end gutter space ad saved from url http internet.e mail footer starts here faqs and answers on history and geography how much do teachers earn around the world what region was known as tripolitania what is patagonia how did the marathon originate store products widget start store products widget end mow inread popup alert popup alert by clicking ok or by using this website you consent to the use of cookies. your personal data will be governed by mapsofworld privacy policy and terms . ok custom mapping gis services get customize mapping solution including atlas maps business maps ipad applications travel maps customized us maps world digital maps for further info please get in touch with us at xc xa xc xa mapxl comparemails.com popup alert popup alert bottom menu bottom menu ist menu countries of the world germany map spain map scotland map brazil map china map india map japan map south africa map all about maps earth map continents of the world countries of the world city maps world atlas custom maps world map poster world map images thematic maps wonders of the world honeymoon destinations us national parks world top ten earthquake maps oceans map mineral maps weather map travel maps rail maps road maps river maps air routes map history maps outline maps world time zone map travel tools utilities flight schedule flags of the world map games mobile applications world weather chart location maps list of lat long finder us map us map with capitals us counties us major cities map us blank map us road map us highways map us river map us rail map us states us cities ist menu end st menu bottom menu closed mow x bottom menu closed utilities utilities international airports flight schedule routeplanner zip code map weltkarte usa karte europakarte deutschlandkarte frankreich karte country information lat long finder countries and capitals embassy finder cartography services gis services tsunami hurricane social share subscribe to our weekly newsletter utilities closed footer logo best world hotels international airlines information flags free maps infographics about us contact us feedback sitemap privacy policy copyright advertise with us new maps info mapsofworld xe x x s editorial calls xc xa mapsofworld business managed by mapxl footer end footer ends here zedo inview google code for remarketing tag remarketing tags may not be associated with personally identifiable information or placed on pages related to sensitive categories. see more information and instructions on how to setup the tag on http google.com ads remarketingsetup google analytic google analytic addthis plugin addthis plugin end addthis plugin end addthis plugin remove popup banner mow x sticky include virtual page scroller.html footer ends here b encyclop xc x dia britannica start your free trial log in xc xb join spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies start your free trial search britannica what are you looking for search click here to search browse popular topics jonestown massacre apollo martin luther roe v. wade history of technology bring fact checked results to the top of your browser search. learn more. turkey written by john c. dewdney malcolm edward yapp last updated sep see article history alternative titles republic of turkey t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti before article turkey country that occupies a unique geographic position lying partly in asia and partly in europe . throughout its history it has acted as both a barrier and a bridge between the two continents. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. the castle of st. peter at bodrum turkey on the aegean coast. xc xa monticelllo dreamstime.com ml turkey is situated at the crossroads of the balkans caucasus middle east and eastern mediterranean . it is among the larger countries of the region in terms of territory and population and its land area is greater than that of any european state. nearly all of the country is in asia comprising the oblong peninsula of asia minor xe x x also known as anatolia anadolu xe x x and in the east part of a mountainous region sometimes known as the armenian highland . the remainder xe x x turkish thrace trakya xe x x lies in the extreme southeastern part of europe a tiny remnant of an empire that once extended over much of the balkans. p turkey encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the country has a north south extent that ranges from about to miles to km and it stretches about miles from west to east. turkey is bounded on the north by the black sea on the northeast by georgia and armenia on the east by azerbaijan and iran on the southeast by iraq and syria on the southwest and west by the mediterranean sea and the aegean sea and on the northwest by greece and bulgaria . the capital is ankara and its largest city and seaport is istanbul . p turkey overview of turkey. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz time lapse video of istanbul. geoff tompkinson gtimage.com istanbul take a video tour of istanbul. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz ml of a total boundary length of some miles km about three fourths is maritime including coastlines along the black sea the aegean and the mediterranean as well as the narrows that link the black and aegean seas. these narrows xe x x which include the bosporus the sea of marmara and the dardanelles xe x x are known collectively as the turkish straits turkey xe x x s control of the straits the only outlet from the black sea has been a major factor in its relations with other states. most of the islands along the aegean coast are greek only the islands of g xc xb k xc xa eada and bozcaada remain in turkish hands. the maritime boundary with greece has been a source of dispute between the two countries on numerous occasions since world war ii . p turkey time lapse video of the northern black sea coast of turkey. piotr wancerz timelapse media boats on the bosporus at istanbul. xc xa faraways shutterstock.com ml a long succession of political entities existed in asia minor over the centuries. turkmen tribes invaded anatolia in the th century ce founding the seljuq empire during the th century the ottoman empire began a long expansion reaching its peak during the th century. the modern turkish republic founded in after the collapse of the ottoman empire is a nationalist secular parliamentary democracy . after a period of one party rule under its founder mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk and his successor turkish governments since the s have been produced by multiparty elections based on universal adult suffrage. p the ottoman empire at its greatest extent. encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml land relief turkey is a predominantly mountainous country and true lowland is confined to the coastal fringes. about one fourth of the surface has an elevation above feet metres and less than two fifths lies below feet metres . mountain crests exceed feet metres in many places particularly in the east where turkey xe x x s highest mountain mount ararat a xc x fr xc xb reaches feet metres close to the borders with armenia and iran. in the southeast the uludoruk peak reaches feet metres though further west the demirkaz xc xb k peak feet metres and mount aydos feet metres are also significant peaks. steep slopes are common throughout the country and flat or gently sloping land makes up barely one sixth of the total area. these relief features affect other aspects of the physical environment producing climates often much harsher than might be expected for a country of turkey xe x x s latitude and reducing the availability and productivity of agricultural land. structurally the country lies within the geologically young folded mountain zone of eurasia which in turkey trends predominantly east to west. the geology of turkey is complex with sedimentary rocks ranging from paleozoic to quaternary numerous intrusions and extensive areas of volcanic material. four main regions can be identified the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif and the arabian platform. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the northern folded zone the northern folded zone comprises a series of mountain ridges increasing in elevation toward the east that occupy a belt about to miles to km wide immediately south of the black sea. the system as a whole is referred to as the pontic mountains do xc x fukaradeniz da xc x flar xc xb . in the west the system has been fractured by the faulting that produced the turkish straits in thrace the ergene lowlands are among the largest in the country and the main mountain range xe x x the y xc xb ld xc xb z istranca xe x x reaches only feet metres . lowlands also occur to the south of the sea of marmara and along the lower sakarya river east of the bosporus. high ridges trending east west rise abruptly from the black sea coast and the coastal plain is thus narrow opening out only in the deltas of the k xc xb z xc xb l and ye xc x fil rivers. these rivers break through the mountain barrier in a zone of weakness where summits are below feet metres dividing the pontic mountains into western and eastern sections. in the western section between the sakarya and k xc xb z xc xb l rivers there are four main ridges the k xc xbcre bolu ilgaz and k xc xb ro xc x flu mountains. east of the ye xc x fil the system is higher narrower and steeper. less than miles from the coast peaks rise to more than feet metres with a maximum elevation of feet metres in the ka xc xa kar range. separated by the narrow trough of the kelkit and xc x oruh river valleys stands a second ridge that rises above feet metres . p the southern folded zone the southern folded zone occupies the southern third of the country from the aegean to the gulf of iskenderun from which it extends to the northeast and east around the northern side of the arabian platform. over most of its length the mediterranean coastal plain is narrow but there are two major lowland embayments. the antalya plain extends inland some miles km from the gulf of antalya the adana plain measuring roughly by miles by km comprises the combined deltas of the seyhan and ceyhan rivers. the mountain system falls into two main parts. west of antalya a complex series of ridges with a north south trend reaches to feet to metres but the most prominent feature is the massive taurus toros mountain system running parallel to the mediterranean coast and extending along the southern border. there crest lines are often above feet metres and several peaks exceed feet metres . p in the eastern third of the country the northern and southern fold systems converge to produce an extensive area of predominantly mountainous terrain with pockets of relatively level land confined to valleys and enclosed basins as are found around malatya elaz xc xb xc x f and mu xc x f . p page of next page the central massif learn more in these related britannica articles pottery turkish a branch of the seljuq turks occupied anatolia from to and was succeeded by the ottoman turks who first extended their lands westward conquering byzantium in and in the th century becoming masters of much of southeastern europe and the lands xe x xa education colonialism and its consequences mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk of turkey who was determined to create a modern state initiated a dramatic program of social and cultural change in which education played an important role. he closed the religious schools promoted coeducation prepared new curricula emphasized vocational and technical education launched a compulsory adult education xe x xa islamic arts dance as entertainment the turks considered dancing a profession for the lowborn as a result most dancers were members of minority groups xe x x mostly greeks jews and armenians. this judgment has usually applied to the status of professional dancers and indeed to most professional entertainers at most periods and in most xe x xa islamic arts the modern period xe x xa military bands and conservatories in turkey and in persia and giuseppe verdi xe x x s opera aida inaugurated the opera house in cairo in . expanding contact with western music caused certain alterations in traditional musical styles. there was a widespread musical renaissance with two main centres the leading school in xe x xa asia water resources xe x xa the one hand and upstream turkey on the other concerns the tigris and euphrates rivers whose headwaters lie in turkey . turkey had already built several dams including the atat xc xbcrk dam on the two rivers and construction has been underway on two more dams on the euphrates at birecik and kargam xc xb xc x f xe x xa additional media index entries more about turkey references found in britannica articles assorted references flag history in flag of turkey art and architecture dance and theatre in islamic arts dance as entertainment embroidery in embroidery islamic architecture in islam architecture music in islamic arts the modern period pottery in pottery turkish commerce industry and mining emery production in emery mohair fibre production in mohair customs and traditions dress in dress the ottoman empire gregorian and muslim calendar in calendar the muslim calendar view more additional reading external websites central intelligence agency the world factbook turkey maps of world turkey europe lonely planet turkey national geographic kids turkey britannica websites articles from britannica encyclopedias for elementary and high school students. turkey children s encyclopedia ages turkey student encyclopedia ages and up article history article contributors feedback corrections updates help us improve this article contact our editors with your feedback. turkey flag of turkey national anthem of turkey official name t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti republic of turkey form of government multiparty republic with one legislative house grand national assembly of turkey head of state and government president recep tayyip erdo xc x fan capital ankara official language turkish official religion none monetary unit turkish lira tl currency exchange rate usd equals . turkish lira population est. population rank population projection total area sq mi total area sq km density persons per sq mi . density persons per sq km . urban rural population urban . rural . life expectancy at birth male xe x x . years female xe x x . years literacy percentage of population age and over literate male female . gni u.s. xe x x gni per capita u.s. amendments to the constitution passed in april and implemented in july expanded the grand national assembly from to seats eliminated the post of prime minister and expanded the role of the president. related people constantine vii porphyrogenitus tansu xc x iller xc xb smet xc xb n xc xb n xc xbc xc x e xc xbckr xc xbc saraco xc x flu enver pa xc x fa st. john chrysostom ziya g xc xb kalp alexius i comnenus theodore metochites epictetus ad related places kars giresun bursa xc xb skenderun k xc xb r xc xb kkale xc x eanl xc xb urfa k xc xbctahya eski xc x fehir xc x orum kayseri ad related topics ataturk dam council of constantinople battle of granicus group of iran in a country at a crossroads jel xc x l xc xab revolts treaty of ankara battle of poson council of nicaea erci xc x f van earthquake of ad featured on britannica demystified society what is gaslighting list technology influential computer programming languages quiz literature language writers of the harlem renaissance spotlight science the fermi paradox where are all the aliens introduction quick facts land relief the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif the arabian platform drainage rivers lakes soils climate overview climatic regions plant and animal life vegetation fauna settlement patterns people language and religion demographic trends economy resources agriculture industry trade transportation administration and social conditions government constitution political parties foreign policy education health and welfare education health and welfare cultural life daily life work dress religious practice social roles and kinship male and female roles marriage and family life social change arts and media sports and recreation history mustafa kemal and the turkish war of independence xe x x the fundamental law and abolition of the sultanate declaration of the turkish republic turkey under mustafa kemal government opposition kemalist policies turkey after kemal xe x x catat xc xbcrk xe x x d world war ii and the postwar era xe x x turkey under the democrats xe x x the economy political repressions the military coup of the national unity committee the constitution of the ascendancy of the right xe x x political developments s to xe x x s military intervention and coalition governments the s the constitution the kurdish conflict the s challenges of the st century turkey under the akp negotiations with the pkk foreign affairs since edit mode turkey tips for editing leave edit mode submit tips for editing we welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. you can make it easier for us to review and hopefully publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. encyclop xc xa dia britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. you may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. any text you add should be original not copied from other sources. at the bottom of the article feel free to list any sources that support your changes so that we can fully understand their context. internet urls are the best. your contribution may be further edited by our staff and its publication is subject to our final approval. unfortunately our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. submit thank you for your contribution our editors will review what you ve submitted and if it meets our criteria we ll add it to the article. please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. uh oh there was a problem with your submission. please try again later. close keep exploring britannica russian empire russian empire historical empire founded on november october old style when the russian xe x xa read this article scott morrison scott morrison australian conservative politician who became leader of the liberal party and prime minister xe x xa read this article china china country of east asia. it is the largest of all asian countries and has the largest population xe x xa read this article view more stay connected facebook twitter youtube instagram pinterest newsletters about us about our ads partner program contact us privacy policy terms of use xc xa encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. menu home spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies login join contents contents page of turkey view all media images videos and audio media print print please select which sections you would like to print table of contents cite share share facebook twitter google linkedin email feedback feedback corrections updates omissions let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article requires login . select feedback type select a type required factual correction spelling grammar correction link correction additional information other submit feedback if you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article you can go to edit mode requires login . thank you for your feedback our editors will review what you xe x x ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. join britannica s publishing partner program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work share share share facebook twitter google linkedin email search email this page email to email from subject comments cancel send xc x close download our free chrome extension britannica insights . facts matter and britannica insights makes it easier to find them. install for chrome now learn more b encyclop xc x dia britannica start your free trial log in xc xb join spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies start your free trial search britannica what are you looking for search click here to search browse popular topics jonestown massacre apollo martin luther roe v. wade history of technology bring fact checked results to the top of your browser search. learn more. turkey written by malcolm edward yapp john c. dewdney last updated sep see article history alternative titles republic of turkey t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti before article turkey country that occupies a unique geographic position lying partly in asia and partly in europe . throughout its history it has acted as both a barrier and a bridge between the two continents. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. the castle of st. peter at bodrum turkey on the aegean coast. xc xa monticelllo dreamstime.com ml turkey is situated at the crossroads of the balkans caucasus middle east and eastern mediterranean . it is among the larger countries of the region in terms of territory and population and its land area is greater than that of any european state. nearly all of the country is in asia comprising the oblong peninsula of asia minor xe x x also known as anatolia anadolu xe x x and in the east part of a mountainous region sometimes known as the armenian highland . the remainder xe x x turkish thrace trakya xe x x lies in the extreme southeastern part of europe a tiny remnant of an empire that once extended over much of the balkans. p turkey encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the country has a north south extent that ranges from about to miles to km and it stretches about miles from west to east. turkey is bounded on the north by the black sea on the northeast by georgia and armenia on the east by azerbaijan and iran on the southeast by iraq and syria on the southwest and west by the mediterranean sea and the aegean sea and on the northwest by greece and bulgaria . the capital is ankara and its largest city and seaport is istanbul . p turkey overview of turkey. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz time lapse video of istanbul. geoff tompkinson gtimage.com istanbul take a video tour of istanbul. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz ml of a total boundary length of some miles km about three fourths is maritime including coastlines along the black sea the aegean and the mediterranean as well as the narrows that link the black and aegean seas. these narrows xe x x which include the bosporus the sea of marmara and the dardanelles xe x x are known collectively as the turkish straits turkey xe x x s control of the straits the only outlet from the black sea has been a major factor in its relations with other states. most of the islands along the aegean coast are greek only the islands of g xc xb k xc xa eada and bozcaada remain in turkish hands. the maritime boundary with greece has been a source of dispute between the two countries on numerous occasions since world war ii . p turkey time lapse video of the northern black sea coast of turkey. piotr wancerz timelapse media boats on the bosporus at istanbul. xc xa faraways shutterstock.com ml a long succession of political entities existed in asia minor over the centuries. turkmen tribes invaded anatolia in the th century ce founding the seljuq empire during the th century the ottoman empire began a long expansion reaching its peak during the th century. the modern turkish republic founded in after the collapse of the ottoman empire is a nationalist secular parliamentary democracy . after a period of one party rule under its founder mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk and his successor turkish governments since the s have been produced by multiparty elections based on universal adult suffrage. p the ottoman empire at its greatest extent. encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml land relief turkey is a predominantly mountainous country and true lowland is confined to the coastal fringes. about one fourth of the surface has an elevation above feet metres and less than two fifths lies below feet metres . mountain crests exceed feet metres in many places particularly in the east where turkey xe x x s highest mountain mount ararat a xc x fr xc xb reaches feet metres close to the borders with armenia and iran. in the southeast the uludoruk peak reaches feet metres though further west the demirkaz xc xb k peak feet metres and mount aydos feet metres are also significant peaks. steep slopes are common throughout the country and flat or gently sloping land makes up barely one sixth of the total area. these relief features affect other aspects of the physical environment producing climates often much harsher than might be expected for a country of turkey xe x x s latitude and reducing the availability and productivity of agricultural land. structurally the country lies within the geologically young folded mountain zone of eurasia which in turkey trends predominantly east to west. the geology of turkey is complex with sedimentary rocks ranging from paleozoic to quaternary numerous intrusions and extensive areas of volcanic material. four main regions can be identified the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif and the arabian platform. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the northern folded zone the northern folded zone comprises a series of mountain ridges increasing in elevation toward the east that occupy a belt about to miles to km wide immediately south of the black sea. the system as a whole is referred to as the pontic mountains do xc x fukaradeniz da xc x flar xc xb . in the west the system has been fractured by the faulting that produced the turkish straits in thrace the ergene lowlands are among the largest in the country and the main mountain range xe x x the y xc xb ld xc xb z istranca xe x x reaches only feet metres . lowlands also occur to the south of the sea of marmara and along the lower sakarya river east of the bosporus. high ridges trending east west rise abruptly from the black sea coast and the coastal plain is thus narrow opening out only in the deltas of the k xc xb z xc xb l and ye xc x fil rivers. these rivers break through the mountain barrier in a zone of weakness where summits are below feet metres dividing the pontic mountains into western and eastern sections. in the western section between the sakarya and k xc xb z xc xb l rivers there are four main ridges the k xc xbcre bolu ilgaz and k xc xb ro xc x flu mountains. east of the ye xc x fil the system is higher narrower and steeper. less than miles from the coast peaks rise to more than feet metres with a maximum elevation of feet metres in the ka xc xa kar range. separated by the narrow trough of the kelkit and xc x oruh river valleys stands a second ridge that rises above feet metres . p the southern folded zone the southern folded zone occupies the southern third of the country from the aegean to the gulf of iskenderun from which it extends to the northeast and east around the northern side of the arabian platform. over most of its length the mediterranean coastal plain is narrow but there are two major lowland embayments. the antalya plain extends inland some miles km from the gulf of antalya the adana plain measuring roughly by miles by km comprises the combined deltas of the seyhan and ceyhan rivers. the mountain system falls into two main parts. west of antalya a complex series of ridges with a north south trend reaches to feet to metres but the most prominent feature is the massive taurus toros mountain system running parallel to the mediterranean coast and extending along the southern border. there crest lines are often above feet metres and several peaks exceed feet metres . p in the eastern third of the country the northern and southern fold systems converge to produce an extensive area of predominantly mountainous terrain with pockets of relatively level land confined to valleys and enclosed basins as are found around malatya elaz xc xb xc x f and mu xc x f . p page of next page the central massif learn more in these related britannica articles pottery turkish a branch of the seljuq turks occupied anatolia from to and was succeeded by the ottoman turks who first extended their lands westward conquering byzantium in and in the th century becoming masters of much of southeastern europe and the lands xe x xa education colonialism and its consequences mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk of turkey who was determined to create a modern state initiated a dramatic program of social and cultural change in which education played an important role. he closed the religious schools promoted coeducation prepared new curricula emphasized vocational and technical education launched a compulsory adult education xe x xa islamic arts dance as entertainment the turks considered dancing a profession for the lowborn as a result most dancers were members of minority groups xe x x mostly greeks jews and armenians. this judgment has usually applied to the status of professional dancers and indeed to most professional entertainers at most periods and in most xe x xa islamic arts the modern period xe x xa military bands and conservatories in turkey and in persia and giuseppe verdi xe x x s opera aida inaugurated the opera house in cairo in . expanding contact with western music caused certain alterations in traditional musical styles. there was a widespread musical renaissance with two main centres the leading school in xe x xa asia water resources xe x xa the one hand and upstream turkey on the other concerns the tigris and euphrates rivers whose headwaters lie in turkey . turkey had already built several dams including the atat xc xbcrk dam on the two rivers and construction has been underway on two more dams on the euphrates at birecik and kargam xc xb xc x f xe x xa additional media index entries more about turkey references found in britannica articles assorted references flag history in flag of turkey art and architecture dance and theatre in islamic arts dance as entertainment embroidery in embroidery islamic architecture in islam architecture music in islamic arts the modern period pottery in pottery turkish commerce industry and mining emery production in emery mohair fibre production in mohair customs and traditions dress in dress the ottoman empire gregorian and muslim calendar in calendar the muslim calendar view more additional reading external websites central intelligence agency the world factbook turkey maps of world turkey europe lonely planet turkey national geographic kids turkey britannica websites articles from britannica encyclopedias for elementary and high school students. turkey children s encyclopedia ages turkey student encyclopedia ages and up article history article contributors feedback corrections updates help us improve this article contact our editors with your feedback. turkey flag of turkey national anthem of turkey official name t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti republic of turkey form of government multiparty republic with one legislative house grand national assembly of turkey head of state and government president recep tayyip erdo xc x fan capital ankara official language turkish official religion none monetary unit turkish lira tl currency exchange rate usd equals . turkish lira population est. population rank population projection total area sq mi total area sq km density persons per sq mi . density persons per sq km . urban rural population urban . rural . life expectancy at birth male xe x x . years female xe x x . years literacy percentage of population age and over literate male female . gni u.s. xe x x gni per capita u.s. amendments to the constitution passed in april and implemented in july expanded the grand national assembly from to seats eliminated the post of prime minister and expanded the role of the president. related people constantine vii porphyrogenitus tansu xc x iller xc xb smet xc xb n xc xb n xc xbc xc x e xc xbckr xc xbc saraco xc x flu enver pa xc x fa st. john chrysostom ziya g xc xb kalp alexius i comnenus theodore metochites epictetus ad related places kars giresun bursa xc xb skenderun k xc xb r xc xb kkale xc x eanl xc xb urfa k xc xbctahya eski xc x fehir xc x orum kayseri ad related topics ataturk dam council of constantinople battle of granicus group of iran in a country at a crossroads jel xc x l xc xab revolts treaty of ankara battle of poson council of nicaea erci xc x f van earthquake of ad featured on britannica demystified society what is gaslighting list technology influential computer programming languages quiz literature language writers of the harlem renaissance spotlight science the fermi paradox where are all the aliens introduction quick facts land relief the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif the arabian platform drainage rivers lakes soils climate overview climatic regions plant and animal life vegetation fauna settlement patterns people language and religion demographic trends economy resources agriculture industry trade transportation administration and social conditions government constitution political parties foreign policy education health and welfare education health and welfare cultural life daily life work dress religious practice social roles and kinship male and female roles marriage and family life social change arts and media sports and recreation history mustafa kemal and the turkish war of independence xe x x the fundamental law and abolition of the sultanate declaration of the turkish republic turkey under mustafa kemal government opposition kemalist policies turkey after kemal xe x x catat xc xbcrk xe x x d world war ii and the postwar era xe x x turkey under the democrats xe x x the economy political repressions the military coup of the national unity committee the constitution of the ascendancy of the right xe x x political developments s to xe x x s military intervention and coalition governments the s the constitution the kurdish conflict the s challenges of the st century turkey under the akp negotiations with the pkk foreign affairs since edit mode turkey tips for editing leave edit mode submit tips for editing we welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. you can make it easier for us to review and hopefully publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. encyclop xc xa dia britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. you may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. any text you add should be original not copied from other sources. at the bottom of the article feel free to list any sources that support your changes so that we can fully understand their context. internet urls are the best. your contribution may be further edited by our staff and its publication is subject to our final approval. unfortunately our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. submit thank you for your contribution our editors will review what you ve submitted and if it meets our criteria we ll add it to the article. please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. uh oh there was a problem with your submission. please try again later. close keep exploring britannica russian empire russian empire historical empire founded on november october old style when the russian xe x xa read this article scott morrison scott morrison australian conservative politician who became leader of the liberal party and prime minister xe x xa read this article china china country of east asia. it is the largest of all asian countries and has the largest population xe x xa read this article view more stay connected facebook twitter youtube instagram pinterest newsletters about us about our ads partner program contact us privacy policy terms of use xc xa encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. menu home spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies login join contents contents page of turkey view all media images videos and audio media print print please select which sections you would like to print table of contents cite share share facebook twitter google linkedin email feedback feedback corrections updates omissions let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article requires login . select feedback type select a type required factual correction spelling grammar correction link correction additional information other submit feedback if you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article you can go to edit mode requires login . thank you for your feedback our editors will review what you xe x x ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. join britannica s publishing partner program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work share share share facebook twitter google linkedin email search email this page email to email from subject comments cancel send xc x close download our free chrome extension britannica insights . facts matter and britannica insights makes it easier to find them. install for chrome now learn more b endif informizely code for site britannica.com . place this code right after the body tag on every page of your site. informizely customer feedback surveys end informizely code. google tag manager noscript end google tag manager noscript start gpt async tag end gpt async tag toggle navigation home articles images videos biographies dictionary compare countries world atlas view other levels kids students scholars take a tour subscribe log in britannica kids students login search xc x turkey view article for kids students scholars article images videos related subscriber features print subscriber feature email subscriber feature cite subscriber feature translate subscriber feature listen subscriber feature xc x contents expand collapse introduction land climate vegetation and animal life climate vegetation animal life people and culture economy transportation and communication economy transportation government history ottoman empire turkish republic under atat xc xbcrk after atat xc xbcrk the cyprus question some recent events kurdish relations official name t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti republic of turkey form of government multiparty republic with one legislative house grand national assembly of turkey head of state and government president recep tayyip erdo xc x fan capital ankara official language turkish official religion none monetary unit turkish lira tl population est. population rank population projection total area sq mi total area sq km density persons per sq mi . density persons per sq km . urban rural population urban . rural . life expectancy at birth male xe x x . years female xe x x . years literacy percentage of population age and over literate male female . gni u.s. xe x x gni per capita u.s. xc xa xc xa amendments to the constitution passed in april and implemented in july expanded the grand national assembly from to seats eliminated the post of prime minister and expanded the role of the president. did you know the silky turkish angora cat originated in turkey near ankara which was formerly called angora. start related resources related resources for this article articles primary sources e books websites view search results for search end related resources added for tts for ie and non html browsers introduction the country of turkey occupies a position between europe and asia . this geographical location has had a major influence on the history of turkey and on the politics and culture of its people. at one time turkey was the heart of the large ottoman empire that contained much of the middle east north africa and southeastern europe. area square miles square kilometers . population est. . since world war i turkey has xe x xa land climate vegetation and animal life people and culture economy transportation and communication government history xc x it xe x x s here the new britannica kids website we xe x x ve been busy working hard to bring you new features and an updated design. we hope you and your family enjoy the new britannica kids. take a minute to check out all the enhancements the same safe and trusted content for explorers of all ages. accessible across all of today s devices phones tablets and desktops. improved homework resources designed to support a variety of curriculum subjects and standards. a new third level of content designed specially to meet the advanced needs of the sophisticated scholar. and so much more want to see it in action take a tour start a free trial subscribe now already subscribed log in here xc x e mail to recipients please enter a valid email address. to share with more than one person separate addresses with a comma from sender name please enter your name. sender email please enter a valid email address. cancel submit translate this page choose a language from the menu above to view a computer translated version of this page. please note text within images is not translated some features may not work properly after translation and the translation may not accurately convey the intended meaning. britannica does not review the converted text. after translating an article all tools except font up font down will be disabled. to re enable the tools or to convert back to english click view original on the google translate toolbar. about us contact us privacy policy terms of use xc xa encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. by continuing to use this site you consent to the terms of our cookie policy which can be found in our privacy policy . xc x b encyclop xc x dia britannica start your free trial log in xc xb join spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies start your free trial search britannica what are you looking for search click here to search browse popular topics jonestown massacre apollo martin luther roe v. wade history of technology bring fact checked results to the top of your browser search. learn more. turkey written by malcolm edward yapp john c. dewdney last updated sep see article history alternative titles republic of turkey t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti before article turkey country that occupies a unique geographic position lying partly in asia and partly in europe . throughout its history it has acted as both a barrier and a bridge between the two continents. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. the castle of st. peter at bodrum turkey on the aegean coast. xc xa monticelllo dreamstime.com ml turkey is situated at the crossroads of the balkans caucasus middle east and eastern mediterranean . it is among the larger countries of the region in terms of territory and population and its land area is greater than that of any european state. nearly all of the country is in asia comprising the oblong peninsula of asia minor xe x x also known as anatolia anadolu xe x x and in the east part of a mountainous region sometimes known as the armenian highland . the remainder xe x x turkish thrace trakya xe x x lies in the extreme southeastern part of europe a tiny remnant of an empire that once extended over much of the balkans. p turkey encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the country has a north south extent that ranges from about to miles to km and it stretches about miles from west to east. turkey is bounded on the north by the black sea on the northeast by georgia and armenia on the east by azerbaijan and iran on the southeast by iraq and syria on the southwest and west by the mediterranean sea and the aegean sea and on the northwest by greece and bulgaria . the capital is ankara and its largest city and seaport is istanbul . p turkey overview of turkey. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz time lapse video of istanbul. geoff tompkinson gtimage.com istanbul take a video tour of istanbul. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz ml of a total boundary length of some miles km about three fourths is maritime including coastlines along the black sea the aegean and the mediterranean as well as the narrows that link the black and aegean seas. these narrows xe x x which include the bosporus the sea of marmara and the dardanelles xe x x are known collectively as the turkish straits turkey xe x x s control of the straits the only outlet from the black sea has been a major factor in its relations with other states. most of the islands along the aegean coast are greek only the islands of g xc xb k xc xa eada and bozcaada remain in turkish hands. the maritime boundary with greece has been a source of dispute between the two countries on numerous occasions since world war ii . p turkey time lapse video of the northern black sea coast of turkey. piotr wancerz timelapse media boats on the bosporus at istanbul. xc xa faraways shutterstock.com ml a long succession of political entities existed in asia minor over the centuries. turkmen tribes invaded anatolia in the th century ce founding the seljuq empire during the th century the ottoman empire began a long expansion reaching its peak during the th century. the modern turkish republic founded in after the collapse of the ottoman empire is a nationalist secular parliamentary democracy . after a period of one party rule under its founder mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk and his successor turkish governments since the s have been produced by multiparty elections based on universal adult suffrage. p the ottoman empire at its greatest extent. encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml land relief turkey is a predominantly mountainous country and true lowland is confined to the coastal fringes. about one fourth of the surface has an elevation above feet metres and less than two fifths lies below feet metres . mountain crests exceed feet metres in many places particularly in the east where turkey xe x x s highest mountain mount ararat a xc x fr xc xb reaches feet metres close to the borders with armenia and iran. in the southeast the uludoruk peak reaches feet metres though further west the demirkaz xc xb k peak feet metres and mount aydos feet metres are also significant peaks. steep slopes are common throughout the country and flat or gently sloping land makes up barely one sixth of the total area. these relief features affect other aspects of the physical environment producing climates often much harsher than might be expected for a country of turkey xe x x s latitude and reducing the availability and productivity of agricultural land. structurally the country lies within the geologically young folded mountain zone of eurasia which in turkey trends predominantly east to west. the geology of turkey is complex with sedimentary rocks ranging from paleozoic to quaternary numerous intrusions and extensive areas of volcanic material. four main regions can be identified the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif and the arabian platform. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the northern folded zone the northern folded zone comprises a series of mountain ridges increasing in elevation toward the east that occupy a belt about to miles to km wide immediately south of the black sea. the system as a whole is referred to as the pontic mountains do xc x fukaradeniz da xc x flar xc xb . in the west the system has been fractured by the faulting that produced the turkish straits in thrace the ergene lowlands are among the largest in the country and the main mountain range xe x x the y xc xb ld xc xb z istranca xe x x reaches only feet metres . lowlands also occur to the south of the sea of marmara and along the lower sakarya river east of the bosporus. high ridges trending east west rise abruptly from the black sea coast and the coastal plain is thus narrow opening out only in the deltas of the k xc xb z xc xb l and ye xc x fil rivers. these rivers break through the mountain barrier in a zone of weakness where summits are below feet metres dividing the pontic mountains into western and eastern sections. in the western section between the sakarya and k xc xb z xc xb l rivers there are four main ridges the k xc xbcre bolu ilgaz and k xc xb ro xc x flu mountains. east of the ye xc x fil the system is higher narrower and steeper. less than miles from the coast peaks rise to more than feet metres with a maximum elevation of feet metres in the ka xc xa kar range. separated by the narrow trough of the kelkit and xc x oruh river valleys stands a second ridge that rises above feet metres . p the southern folded zone the southern folded zone occupies the southern third of the country from the aegean to the gulf of iskenderun from which it extends to the northeast and east around the northern side of the arabian platform. over most of its length the mediterranean coastal plain is narrow but there are two major lowland embayments. the antalya plain extends inland some miles km from the gulf of antalya the adana plain measuring roughly by miles by km comprises the combined deltas of the seyhan and ceyhan rivers. the mountain system falls into two main parts. west of antalya a complex series of ridges with a north south trend reaches to feet to metres but the most prominent feature is the massive taurus toros mountain system running parallel to the mediterranean coast and extending along the southern border. there crest lines are often above feet metres and several peaks exceed feet metres . p in the eastern third of the country the northern and southern fold systems converge to produce an extensive area of predominantly mountainous terrain with pockets of relatively level land confined to valleys and enclosed basins as are found around malatya elaz xc xb xc x f and mu xc x f . p page of next page the central massif learn more in these related britannica articles pottery turkish a branch of the seljuq turks occupied anatolia from to and was succeeded by the ottoman turks who first extended their lands westward conquering byzantium in and in the th century becoming masters of much of southeastern europe and the lands xe x xa education colonialism and its consequences mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk of turkey who was determined to create a modern state initiated a dramatic program of social and cultural change in which education played an important role. he closed the religious schools promoted coeducation prepared new curricula emphasized vocational and technical education launched a compulsory adult education xe x xa islamic arts dance as entertainment the turks considered dancing a profession for the lowborn as a result most dancers were members of minority groups xe x x mostly greeks jews and armenians. this judgment has usually applied to the status of professional dancers and indeed to most professional entertainers at most periods and in most xe x xa islamic arts the modern period xe x xa military bands and conservatories in turkey and in persia and giuseppe verdi xe x x s opera aida inaugurated the opera house in cairo in . expanding contact with western music caused certain alterations in traditional musical styles. there was a widespread musical renaissance with two main centres the leading school in xe x xa asia water resources xe x xa the one hand and upstream turkey on the other concerns the tigris and euphrates rivers whose headwaters lie in turkey . turkey had already built several dams including the atat xc xbcrk dam on the two rivers and construction has been underway on two more dams on the euphrates at birecik and kargam xc xb xc x f xe x xa additional media index entries more about turkey references found in britannica articles assorted references flag history in flag of turkey art and architecture dance and theatre in islamic arts dance as entertainment embroidery in embroidery islamic architecture in islam architecture music in islamic arts the modern period pottery in pottery turkish commerce industry and mining emery production in emery mohair fibre production in mohair customs and traditions dress in dress the ottoman empire gregorian and muslim calendar in calendar the muslim calendar view more additional reading external websites central intelligence agency the world factbook turkey maps of world turkey europe lonely planet turkey national geographic kids turkey britannica websites articles from britannica encyclopedias for elementary and high school students. turkey children s encyclopedia ages turkey student encyclopedia ages and up article history article contributors feedback corrections updates help us improve this article contact our editors with your feedback. turkey flag of turkey national anthem of turkey official name t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti republic of turkey form of government multiparty republic with one legislative house grand national assembly of turkey head of state and government president recep tayyip erdo xc x fan capital ankara official language turkish official religion none monetary unit turkish lira tl currency exchange rate usd equals . turkish lira population est. population rank population projection total area sq mi total area sq km density persons per sq mi . density persons per sq km . urban rural population urban . rural . life expectancy at birth male xe x x . years female xe x x . years literacy percentage of population age and over literate male female . gni u.s. xe x x gni per capita u.s. amendments to the constitution passed in april and implemented in july expanded the grand national assembly from to seats eliminated the post of prime minister and expanded the role of the president. related people constantine vii porphyrogenitus tansu xc x iller xc xb smet xc xb n xc xb n xc xbc xc x e xc xbckr xc xbc saraco xc x flu enver pa xc x fa st. john chrysostom ziya g xc xb kalp alexius i comnenus theodore metochites epictetus ad related places kars giresun bursa xc xb skenderun k xc xb r xc xb kkale xc x eanl xc xb urfa k xc xbctahya eski xc x fehir xc x orum kayseri ad related topics ataturk dam council of constantinople battle of granicus group of iran in a country at a crossroads jel xc x l xc xab revolts treaty of ankara battle of poson council of nicaea erci xc x f van earthquake of ad featured on britannica demystified society what is gaslighting list technology influential computer programming languages quiz literature language writers of the harlem renaissance spotlight science the fermi paradox where are all the aliens introduction quick facts land relief the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif the arabian platform drainage rivers lakes soils climate overview climatic regions plant and animal life vegetation fauna settlement patterns people language and religion demographic trends economy resources agriculture industry trade transportation administration and social conditions government constitution political parties foreign policy education health and welfare education health and welfare cultural life daily life work dress religious practice social roles and kinship male and female roles marriage and family life social change arts and media sports and recreation history mustafa kemal and the turkish war of independence xe x x the fundamental law and abolition of the sultanate declaration of the turkish republic turkey under mustafa kemal government opposition kemalist policies turkey after kemal xe x x catat xc xbcrk xe x x d world war ii and the postwar era xe x x turkey under the democrats xe x x the economy political repressions the military coup of the national unity committee the constitution of the ascendancy of the right xe x x political developments s to xe x x s military intervention and coalition governments the s the constitution the kurdish conflict the s challenges of the st century turkey under the akp negotiations with the pkk foreign affairs since edit mode turkey tips for editing leave edit mode submit tips for editing we welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. you can make it easier for us to review and hopefully publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. encyclop xc xa dia britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. you may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. any text you add should be original not copied from other sources. at the bottom of the article feel free to list any sources that support your changes so that we can fully understand their context. internet urls are the best. your contribution may be further edited by our staff and its publication is subject to our final approval. unfortunately our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. submit thank you for your contribution our editors will review what you ve submitted and if it meets our criteria we ll add it to the article. please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. uh oh there was a problem with your submission. please try again later. close keep exploring britannica russian empire russian empire historical empire founded on november october old style when the russian xe x xa read this article scott morrison scott morrison australian conservative politician who became leader of the liberal party and prime minister xe x xa read this article china china country of east asia. it is the largest of all asian countries and has the largest population xe x xa read this article view more stay connected facebook twitter youtube instagram pinterest newsletters about us about our ads partner program contact us privacy policy terms of use xc xa encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. menu home spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies login join contents contents page of turkey view all media images videos and audio media print print please select which sections you would like to print table of contents cite share share facebook twitter google linkedin email feedback feedback corrections updates omissions let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article requires login . select feedback type select a type required factual correction spelling grammar correction link correction additional information other submit feedback if you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article you can go to edit mode requires login . thank you for your feedback our editors will review what you xe x x ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. join britannica s publishing partner program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work share share share facebook twitter google linkedin email search email this page email to email from subject comments cancel send xc x close download our free chrome extension britannica insights . facts matter and britannica insights makes it easier to find them. install for chrome now learn more b encyclop xc x dia britannica start your free trial log in xc xb join spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies start your free trial search britannica what are you looking for search click here to search browse popular topics jonestown massacre apollo martin luther roe v. wade history of technology bring fact checked results to the top of your browser search. learn more. turkey written by malcolm edward yapp john c. dewdney last updated sep see article history alternative titles republic of turkey t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti before article turkey country that occupies a unique geographic position lying partly in asia and partly in europe . throughout its history it has acted as both a barrier and a bridge between the two continents. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. the castle of st. peter at bodrum turkey on the aegean coast. xc xa monticelllo dreamstime.com ml turkey is situated at the crossroads of the balkans caucasus middle east and eastern mediterranean . it is among the larger countries of the region in terms of territory and population and its land area is greater than that of any european state. nearly all of the country is in asia comprising the oblong peninsula of asia minor xe x x also known as anatolia anadolu xe x x and in the east part of a mountainous region sometimes known as the armenian highland . the remainder xe x x turkish thrace trakya xe x x lies in the extreme southeastern part of europe a tiny remnant of an empire that once extended over much of the balkans. p turkey encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the country has a north south extent that ranges from about to miles to km and it stretches about miles from west to east. turkey is bounded on the north by the black sea on the northeast by georgia and armenia on the east by azerbaijan and iran on the southeast by iraq and syria on the southwest and west by the mediterranean sea and the aegean sea and on the northwest by greece and bulgaria . the capital is ankara and its largest city and seaport is istanbul . p turkey overview of turkey. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz time lapse video of istanbul. geoff tompkinson gtimage.com istanbul take a video tour of istanbul. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz ml of a total boundary length of some miles km about three fourths is maritime including coastlines along the black sea the aegean and the mediterranean as well as the narrows that link the black and aegean seas. these narrows xe x x which include the bosporus the sea of marmara and the dardanelles xe x x are known collectively as the turkish straits turkey xe x x s control of the straits the only outlet from the black sea has been a major factor in its relations with other states. most of the islands along the aegean coast are greek only the islands of g xc xb k xc xa eada and bozcaada remain in turkish hands. the maritime boundary with greece has been a source of dispute between the two countries on numerous occasions since world war ii . p turkey time lapse video of the northern black sea coast of turkey. piotr wancerz timelapse media boats on the bosporus at istanbul. xc xa faraways shutterstock.com ml a long succession of political entities existed in asia minor over the centuries. turkmen tribes invaded anatolia in the th century ce founding the seljuq empire during the th century the ottoman empire began a long expansion reaching its peak during the th century. the modern turkish republic founded in after the collapse of the ottoman empire is a nationalist secular parliamentary democracy . after a period of one party rule under its founder mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk and his successor turkish governments since the s have been produced by multiparty elections based on universal adult suffrage. p the ottoman empire at its greatest extent. encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml land relief turkey is a predominantly mountainous country and true lowland is confined to the coastal fringes. about one fourth of the surface has an elevation above feet metres and less than two fifths lies below feet metres . mountain crests exceed feet metres in many places particularly in the east where turkey xe x x s highest mountain mount ararat a xc x fr xc xb reaches feet metres close to the borders with armenia and iran. in the southeast the uludoruk peak reaches feet metres though further west the demirkaz xc xb k peak feet metres and mount aydos feet metres are also significant peaks. steep slopes are common throughout the country and flat or gently sloping land makes up barely one sixth of the total area. these relief features affect other aspects of the physical environment producing climates often much harsher than might be expected for a country of turkey xe x x s latitude and reducing the availability and productivity of agricultural land. structurally the country lies within the geologically young folded mountain zone of eurasia which in turkey trends predominantly east to west. the geology of turkey is complex with sedimentary rocks ranging from paleozoic to quaternary numerous intrusions and extensive areas of volcanic material. four main regions can be identified the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif and the arabian platform. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the northern folded zone the northern folded zone comprises a series of mountain ridges increasing in elevation toward the east that occupy a belt about to miles to km wide immediately south of the black sea. the system as a whole is referred to as the pontic mountains do xc x fukaradeniz da xc x flar xc xb . in the west the system has been fractured by the faulting that produced the turkish straits in thrace the ergene lowlands are among the largest in the country and the main mountain range xe x x the y xc xb ld xc xb z istranca xe x x reaches only feet metres . lowlands also occur to the south of the sea of marmara and along the lower sakarya river east of the bosporus. high ridges trending east west rise abruptly from the black sea coast and the coastal plain is thus narrow opening out only in the deltas of the k xc xb z xc xb l and ye xc x fil rivers. these rivers break through the mountain barrier in a zone of weakness where summits are below feet metres dividing the pontic mountains into western and eastern sections. in the western section between the sakarya and k xc xb z xc xb l rivers there are four main ridges the k xc xbcre bolu ilgaz and k xc xb ro xc x flu mountains. east of the ye xc x fil the system is higher narrower and steeper. less than miles from the coast peaks rise to more than feet metres with a maximum elevation of feet metres in the ka xc xa kar range. separated by the narrow trough of the kelkit and xc x oruh river valleys stands a second ridge that rises above feet metres . p the southern folded zone the southern folded zone occupies the southern third of the country from the aegean to the gulf of iskenderun from which it extends to the northeast and east around the northern side of the arabian platform. over most of its length the mediterranean coastal plain is narrow but there are two major lowland embayments. the antalya plain extends inland some miles km from the gulf of antalya the adana plain measuring roughly by miles by km comprises the combined deltas of the seyhan and ceyhan rivers. the mountain system falls into two main parts. west of antalya a complex series of ridges with a north south trend reaches to feet to metres but the most prominent feature is the massive taurus toros mountain system running parallel to the mediterranean coast and extending along the southern border. there crest lines are often above feet metres and several peaks exceed feet metres . p in the eastern third of the country the northern and southern fold systems converge to produce an extensive area of predominantly mountainous terrain with pockets of relatively level land confined to valleys and enclosed basins as are found around malatya elaz xc xb xc x f and mu xc x f . p page of next page the central massif learn more in these related britannica articles pottery turkish a branch of the seljuq turks occupied anatolia from to and was succeeded by the ottoman turks who first extended their lands westward conquering byzantium in and in the th century becoming masters of much of southeastern europe and the lands xe x xa education colonialism and its consequences mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk of turkey who was determined to create a modern state initiated a dramatic program of social and cultural change in which education played an important role. he closed the religious schools promoted coeducation prepared new curricula emphasized vocational and technical education launched a compulsory adult education xe x xa islamic arts dance as entertainment the turks considered dancing a profession for the lowborn as a result most dancers were members of minority groups xe x x mostly greeks jews and armenians. this judgment has usually applied to the status of professional dancers and indeed to most professional entertainers at most periods and in most xe x xa islamic arts the modern period xe x xa military bands and conservatories in turkey and in persia and giuseppe verdi xe x x s opera aida inaugurated the opera house in cairo in . expanding contact with western music caused certain alterations in traditional musical styles. there was a widespread musical renaissance with two main centres the leading school in xe x xa asia water resources xe x xa the one hand and upstream turkey on the other concerns the tigris and euphrates rivers whose headwaters lie in turkey . turkey had already built several dams including the atat xc xbcrk dam on the two rivers and construction has been underway on two more dams on the euphrates at birecik and kargam xc xb xc x f xe x xa additional media index entries more about turkey references found in britannica articles assorted references flag history in flag of turkey art and architecture dance and theatre in islamic arts dance as entertainment embroidery in embroidery islamic architecture in islam architecture music in islamic arts the modern period pottery in pottery turkish commerce industry and mining emery production in emery mohair fibre production in mohair customs and traditions dress in dress the ottoman empire gregorian and muslim calendar in calendar the muslim calendar view more additional reading external websites central intelligence agency the world factbook turkey maps of world turkey europe lonely planet turkey national geographic kids turkey britannica websites articles from britannica encyclopedias for elementary and high school students. turkey children s encyclopedia ages turkey student encyclopedia ages and up article history article contributors feedback corrections updates help us improve this article contact our editors with your feedback. turkey flag of turkey national anthem of turkey official name t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti republic of turkey form of government multiparty republic with one legislative house grand national assembly of turkey head of state and government president recep tayyip erdo xc x fan capital ankara official language turkish official religion none monetary unit turkish lira tl currency exchange rate usd equals . turkish lira population est. population rank population projection total area sq mi total area sq km density persons per sq mi . density persons per sq km . urban rural population urban . rural . life expectancy at birth male xe x x . years female xe x x . years literacy percentage of population age and over literate male female . gni u.s. xe x x gni per capita u.s. amendments to the constitution passed in april and implemented in july expanded the grand national assembly from to seats eliminated the post of prime minister and expanded the role of the president. related people constantine vii porphyrogenitus tansu xc x iller xc xb smet xc xb n xc xb n xc xbc xc x e xc xbckr xc xbc saraco xc x flu enver pa xc x fa st. john chrysostom ziya g xc xb kalp alexius i comnenus theodore metochites epictetus ad related places kars giresun bursa xc xb skenderun k xc xb r xc xb kkale xc x eanl xc xb urfa k xc xbctahya eski xc x fehir xc x orum kayseri ad related topics ataturk dam council of constantinople battle of granicus group of iran in a country at a crossroads jel xc x l xc xab revolts treaty of ankara battle of poson council of nicaea erci xc x f van earthquake of ad featured on britannica demystified society what is gaslighting list technology influential computer programming languages quiz literature language writers of the harlem renaissance spotlight science the fermi paradox where are all the aliens introduction quick facts land relief the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif the arabian platform drainage rivers lakes soils climate overview climatic regions plant and animal life vegetation fauna settlement patterns people language and religion demographic trends economy resources agriculture industry trade transportation administration and social conditions government constitution political parties foreign policy education health and welfare education health and welfare cultural life daily life work dress religious practice social roles and kinship male and female roles marriage and family life social change arts and media sports and recreation history mustafa kemal and the turkish war of independence xe x x the fundamental law and abolition of the sultanate declaration of the turkish republic turkey under mustafa kemal government opposition kemalist policies turkey after kemal xe x x catat xc xbcrk xe x x d world war ii and the postwar era xe x x turkey under the democrats xe x x the economy political repressions the military coup of the national unity committee the constitution of the ascendancy of the right xe x x political developments s to xe x x s military intervention and coalition governments the s the constitution the kurdish conflict the s challenges of the st century turkey under the akp negotiations with the pkk foreign affairs since edit mode turkey tips for editing leave edit mode submit tips for editing we welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. you can make it easier for us to review and hopefully publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. encyclop xc xa dia britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. you may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. any text you add should be original not copied from other sources. at the bottom of the article feel free to list any sources that support your changes so that we can fully understand their context. internet urls are the best. your contribution may be further edited by our staff and its publication is subject to our final approval. unfortunately our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. submit thank you for your contribution our editors will review what you ve submitted and if it meets our criteria we ll add it to the article. please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. uh oh there was a problem with your submission. please try again later. close keep exploring britannica russian empire russian empire historical empire founded on november october old style when the russian xe x xa read this article scott morrison scott morrison australian conservative politician who became leader of the liberal party and prime minister xe x xa read this article china china country of east asia. it is the largest of all asian countries and has the largest population xe x xa read this article view more stay connected facebook twitter youtube instagram pinterest newsletters about us about our ads partner program contact us privacy policy terms of use xc xa encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. menu home spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies login join contents contents page of turkey view all media images videos and audio media print print please select which sections you would like to print table of contents cite share share facebook twitter google linkedin email feedback feedback corrections updates omissions let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article requires login . select feedback type select a type required factual correction spelling grammar correction link correction additional information other submit feedback if you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article you can go to edit mode requires login . thank you for your feedback our editors will review what you xe x x ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. join britannica s publishing partner program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work share share share facebook twitter google linkedin email search email this page email to email from subject comments cancel send xc x close download our free chrome extension britannica insights . facts matter and britannica insights makes it easier to find them. install for chrome now learn more b encyclop xc x dia britannica start your free trial log in xc xb join spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies start your free trial search britannica what are you looking for search click here to search browse popular topics jonestown massacre apollo martin luther roe v. wade history of technology bring fact checked results to the top of your browser search. learn more. turkey written by john c. dewdney malcolm edward yapp last updated sep see article history alternative titles republic of turkey t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti before article turkey country that occupies a unique geographic position lying partly in asia and partly in europe . throughout its history it has acted as both a barrier and a bridge between the two continents. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. the castle of st. peter at bodrum turkey on the aegean coast. xc xa monticelllo dreamstime.com ml turkey is situated at the crossroads of the balkans caucasus middle east and eastern mediterranean . it is among the larger countries of the region in terms of territory and population and its land area is greater than that of any european state. nearly all of the country is in asia comprising the oblong peninsula of asia minor xe x x also known as anatolia anadolu xe x x and in the east part of a mountainous region sometimes known as the armenian highland . the remainder xe x x turkish thrace trakya xe x x lies in the extreme southeastern part of europe a tiny remnant of an empire that once extended over much of the balkans. p turkey encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the country has a north south extent that ranges from about to miles to km and it stretches about miles from west to east. turkey is bounded on the north by the black sea on the northeast by georgia and armenia on the east by azerbaijan and iran on the southeast by iraq and syria on the southwest and west by the mediterranean sea and the aegean sea and on the northwest by greece and bulgaria . the capital is ankara and its largest city and seaport is istanbul . p turkey overview of turkey. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz time lapse video of istanbul. geoff tompkinson gtimage.com istanbul take a video tour of istanbul. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz ml of a total boundary length of some miles km about three fourths is maritime including coastlines along the black sea the aegean and the mediterranean as well as the narrows that link the black and aegean seas. these narrows xe x x which include the bosporus the sea of marmara and the dardanelles xe x x are known collectively as the turkish straits turkey xe x x s control of the straits the only outlet from the black sea has been a major factor in its relations with other states. most of the islands along the aegean coast are greek only the islands of g xc xb k xc xa eada and bozcaada remain in turkish hands. the maritime boundary with greece has been a source of dispute between the two countries on numerous occasions since world war ii . p turkey time lapse video of the northern black sea coast of turkey. piotr wancerz timelapse media boats on the bosporus at istanbul. xc xa faraways shutterstock.com ml a long succession of political entities existed in asia minor over the centuries. turkmen tribes invaded anatolia in the th century ce founding the seljuq empire during the th century the ottoman empire began a long expansion reaching its peak during the th century. the modern turkish republic founded in after the collapse of the ottoman empire is a nationalist secular parliamentary democracy . after a period of one party rule under its founder mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk and his successor turkish governments since the s have been produced by multiparty elections based on universal adult suffrage. p the ottoman empire at its greatest extent. encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml land relief turkey is a predominantly mountainous country and true lowland is confined to the coastal fringes. about one fourth of the surface has an elevation above feet metres and less than two fifths lies below feet metres . mountain crests exceed feet metres in many places particularly in the east where turkey xe x x s highest mountain mount ararat a xc x fr xc xb reaches feet metres close to the borders with armenia and iran. in the southeast the uludoruk peak reaches feet metres though further west the demirkaz xc xb k peak feet metres and mount aydos feet metres are also significant peaks. steep slopes are common throughout the country and flat or gently sloping land makes up barely one sixth of the total area. these relief features affect other aspects of the physical environment producing climates often much harsher than might be expected for a country of turkey xe x x s latitude and reducing the availability and productivity of agricultural land. structurally the country lies within the geologically young folded mountain zone of eurasia which in turkey trends predominantly east to west. the geology of turkey is complex with sedimentary rocks ranging from paleozoic to quaternary numerous intrusions and extensive areas of volcanic material. four main regions can be identified the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif and the arabian platform. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the northern folded zone the northern folded zone comprises a series of mountain ridges increasing in elevation toward the east that occupy a belt about to miles to km wide immediately south of the black sea. the system as a whole is referred to as the pontic mountains do xc x fukaradeniz da xc x flar xc xb . in the west the system has been fractured by the faulting that produced the turkish straits in thrace the ergene lowlands are among the largest in the country and the main mountain range xe x x the y xc xb ld xc xb z istranca xe x x reaches only feet metres . lowlands also occur to the south of the sea of marmara and along the lower sakarya river east of the bosporus. high ridges trending east west rise abruptly from the black sea coast and the coastal plain is thus narrow opening out only in the deltas of the k xc xb z xc xb l and ye xc x fil rivers. these rivers break through the mountain barrier in a zone of weakness where summits are below feet metres dividing the pontic mountains into western and eastern sections. in the western section between the sakarya and k xc xb z xc xb l rivers there are four main ridges the k xc xbcre bolu ilgaz and k xc xb ro xc x flu mountains. east of the ye xc x fil the system is higher narrower and steeper. less than miles from the coast peaks rise to more than feet metres with a maximum elevation of feet metres in the ka xc xa kar range. separated by the narrow trough of the kelkit and xc x oruh river valleys stands a second ridge that rises above feet metres . p the southern folded zone the southern folded zone occupies the southern third of the country from the aegean to the gulf of iskenderun from which it extends to the northeast and east around the northern side of the arabian platform. over most of its length the mediterranean coastal plain is narrow but there are two major lowland embayments. the antalya plain extends inland some miles km from the gulf of antalya the adana plain measuring roughly by miles by km comprises the combined deltas of the seyhan and ceyhan rivers. the mountain system falls into two main parts. west of antalya a complex series of ridges with a north south trend reaches to feet to metres but the most prominent feature is the massive taurus toros mountain system running parallel to the mediterranean coast and extending along the southern border. there crest lines are often above feet metres and several peaks exceed feet metres . p in the eastern third of the country the northern and southern fold systems converge to produce an extensive area of predominantly mountainous terrain with pockets of relatively level land confined to valleys and enclosed basins as are found around malatya elaz xc xb xc x f and mu xc x f . p page of next page the central massif learn more in these related britannica articles pottery turkish a branch of the seljuq turks occupied anatolia from to and was succeeded by the ottoman turks who first extended their lands westward conquering byzantium in and in the th century becoming masters of much of southeastern europe and the lands xe x xa education colonialism and its consequences mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk of turkey who was determined to create a modern state initiated a dramatic program of social and cultural change in which education played an important role. he closed the religious schools promoted coeducation prepared new curricula emphasized vocational and technical education launched a compulsory adult education xe x xa islamic arts dance as entertainment the turks considered dancing a profession for the lowborn as a result most dancers were members of minority groups xe x x mostly greeks jews and armenians. this judgment has usually applied to the status of professional dancers and indeed to most professional entertainers at most periods and in most xe x xa islamic arts the modern period xe x xa military bands and conservatories in turkey and in persia and giuseppe verdi xe x x s opera aida inaugurated the opera house in cairo in . expanding contact with western music caused certain alterations in traditional musical styles. there was a widespread musical renaissance with two main centres the leading school in xe x xa asia water resources xe x xa the one hand and upstream turkey on the other concerns the tigris and euphrates rivers whose headwaters lie in turkey . turkey had already built several dams including the atat xc xbcrk dam on the two rivers and construction has been underway on two more dams on the euphrates at birecik and kargam xc xb xc x f xe x xa additional media index entries more about turkey references found in britannica articles assorted references flag history in flag of turkey art and architecture dance and theatre in islamic arts dance as entertainment embroidery in embroidery islamic architecture in islam architecture music in islamic arts the modern period pottery in pottery turkish commerce industry and mining emery production in emery mohair fibre production in mohair customs and traditions dress in dress the ottoman empire gregorian and muslim calendar in calendar the muslim calendar view more additional reading external websites central intelligence agency the world factbook turkey maps of world turkey europe lonely planet turkey national geographic kids turkey britannica websites articles from britannica encyclopedias for elementary and high school students. turkey children s encyclopedia ages turkey student encyclopedia ages and up article history article contributors feedback corrections updates help us improve this article contact our editors with your feedback. turkey flag of turkey national anthem of turkey official name t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti republic of turkey form of government multiparty republic with one legislative house grand national assembly of turkey head of state and government president recep tayyip erdo xc x fan capital ankara official language turkish official religion none monetary unit turkish lira tl currency exchange rate usd equals . turkish lira population est. population rank population projection total area sq mi total area sq km density persons per sq mi . density persons per sq km . urban rural population urban . rural . life expectancy at birth male xe x x . years female xe x x . years literacy percentage of population age and over literate male female . gni u.s. xe x x gni per capita u.s. amendments to the constitution passed in april and implemented in july expanded the grand national assembly from to seats eliminated the post of prime minister and expanded the role of the president. related people constantine vii porphyrogenitus tansu xc x iller xc xb smet xc xb n xc xb n xc xbc xc x e xc xbckr xc xbc saraco xc x flu enver pa xc x fa st. john chrysostom ziya g xc xb kalp alexius i comnenus theodore metochites epictetus ad related places kars giresun bursa xc xb skenderun k xc xb r xc xb kkale xc x eanl xc xb urfa k xc xbctahya eski xc x fehir xc x orum kayseri ad related topics ataturk dam council of constantinople battle of granicus group of iran in a country at a crossroads jel xc x l xc xab revolts treaty of ankara battle of poson council of nicaea erci xc x f van earthquake of ad featured on britannica demystified society what is gaslighting list technology influential computer programming languages quiz literature language writers of the harlem renaissance spotlight science the fermi paradox where are all the aliens introduction quick facts land relief the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif the arabian platform drainage rivers lakes soils climate overview climatic regions plant and animal life vegetation fauna settlement patterns people language and religion demographic trends economy resources agriculture industry trade transportation administration and social conditions government constitution political parties foreign policy education health and welfare education health and welfare cultural life daily life work dress religious practice social roles and kinship male and female roles marriage and family life social change arts and media sports and recreation history mustafa kemal and the turkish war of independence xe x x the fundamental law and abolition of the sultanate declaration of the turkish republic turkey under mustafa kemal government opposition kemalist policies turkey after kemal xe x x catat xc xbcrk xe x x d world war ii and the postwar era xe x x turkey under the democrats xe x x the economy political repressions the military coup of the national unity committee the constitution of the ascendancy of the right xe x x political developments s to xe x x s military intervention and coalition governments the s the constitution the kurdish conflict the s challenges of the st century turkey under the akp negotiations with the pkk foreign affairs since edit mode turkey tips for editing leave edit mode submit tips for editing we welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. you can make it easier for us to review and hopefully publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. encyclop xc xa dia britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. you may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. any text you add should be original not copied from other sources. at the bottom of the article feel free to list any sources that support your changes so that we can fully understand their context. internet urls are the best. your contribution may be further edited by our staff and its publication is subject to our final approval. unfortunately our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. submit thank you for your contribution our editors will review what you ve submitted and if it meets our criteria we ll add it to the article. please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. uh oh there was a problem with your submission. please try again later. close keep exploring britannica russian empire russian empire historical empire founded on november october old style when the russian xe x xa read this article scott morrison scott morrison australian conservative politician who became leader of the liberal party and prime minister xe x xa read this article china china country of east asia. it is the largest of all asian countries and has the largest population xe x xa read this article view more stay connected facebook twitter youtube instagram pinterest newsletters about us about our ads partner program contact us privacy policy terms of use xc xa encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. menu home spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies login join contents contents page of turkey view all media images videos and audio media print print please select which sections you would like to print table of contents cite share share facebook twitter google linkedin email feedback feedback corrections updates omissions let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article requires login . select feedback type select a type required factual correction spelling grammar correction link correction additional information other submit feedback if you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article you can go to edit mode requires login . thank you for your feedback our editors will review what you xe x x ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. join britannica s publishing partner program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work share share share facebook twitter google linkedin email search email this page email to email from subject comments cancel send xc x close download our free chrome extension britannica insights . facts matter and britannica insights makes it easier to find them. install for chrome now learn more b encyclop xc x dia britannica start your free trial log in xc xb join spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies start your free trial search britannica what are you looking for search click here to search browse popular topics jonestown massacre apollo martin luther roe v. wade history of technology bring fact checked results to the top of your browser search. learn more. turkey written by john c. dewdney malcolm edward yapp last updated sep see article history alternative titles republic of turkey t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti before article turkey country that occupies a unique geographic position lying partly in asia and partly in europe . throughout its history it has acted as both a barrier and a bridge between the two continents. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. the castle of st. peter at bodrum turkey on the aegean coast. xc xa monticelllo dreamstime.com ml turkey is situated at the crossroads of the balkans caucasus middle east and eastern mediterranean . it is among the larger countries of the region in terms of territory and population and its land area is greater than that of any european state. nearly all of the country is in asia comprising the oblong peninsula of asia minor xe x x also known as anatolia anadolu xe x x and in the east part of a mountainous region sometimes known as the armenian highland . the remainder xe x x turkish thrace trakya xe x x lies in the extreme southeastern part of europe a tiny remnant of an empire that once extended over much of the balkans. p turkey encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the country has a north south extent that ranges from about to miles to km and it stretches about miles from west to east. turkey is bounded on the north by the black sea on the northeast by georgia and armenia on the east by azerbaijan and iran on the southeast by iraq and syria on the southwest and west by the mediterranean sea and the aegean sea and on the northwest by greece and bulgaria . the capital is ankara and its largest city and seaport is istanbul . p turkey overview of turkey. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz time lapse video of istanbul. geoff tompkinson gtimage.com istanbul take a video tour of istanbul. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz ml of a total boundary length of some miles km about three fourths is maritime including coastlines along the black sea the aegean and the mediterranean as well as the narrows that link the black and aegean seas. these narrows xe x x which include the bosporus the sea of marmara and the dardanelles xe x x are known collectively as the turkish straits turkey xe x x s control of the straits the only outlet from the black sea has been a major factor in its relations with other states. most of the islands along the aegean coast are greek only the islands of g xc xb k xc xa eada and bozcaada remain in turkish hands. the maritime boundary with greece has been a source of dispute between the two countries on numerous occasions since world war ii . p turkey time lapse video of the northern black sea coast of turkey. piotr wancerz timelapse media boats on the bosporus at istanbul. xc xa faraways shutterstock.com ml a long succession of political entities existed in asia minor over the centuries. turkmen tribes invaded anatolia in the th century ce founding the seljuq empire during the th century the ottoman empire began a long expansion reaching its peak during the th century. the modern turkish republic founded in after the collapse of the ottoman empire is a nationalist secular parliamentary democracy . after a period of one party rule under its founder mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk and his successor turkish governments since the s have been produced by multiparty elections based on universal adult suffrage. p the ottoman empire at its greatest extent. encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml land relief turkey is a predominantly mountainous country and true lowland is confined to the coastal fringes. about one fourth of the surface has an elevation above feet metres and less than two fifths lies below feet metres . mountain crests exceed feet metres in many places particularly in the east where turkey xe x x s highest mountain mount ararat a xc x fr xc xb reaches feet metres close to the borders with armenia and iran. in the southeast the uludoruk peak reaches feet metres though further west the demirkaz xc xb k peak feet metres and mount aydos feet metres are also significant peaks. steep slopes are common throughout the country and flat or gently sloping land makes up barely one sixth of the total area. these relief features affect other aspects of the physical environment producing climates often much harsher than might be expected for a country of turkey xe x x s latitude and reducing the availability and productivity of agricultural land. structurally the country lies within the geologically young folded mountain zone of eurasia which in turkey trends predominantly east to west. the geology of turkey is complex with sedimentary rocks ranging from paleozoic to quaternary numerous intrusions and extensive areas of volcanic material. four main regions can be identified the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif and the arabian platform. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the northern folded zone the northern folded zone comprises a series of mountain ridges increasing in elevation toward the east that occupy a belt about to miles to km wide immediately south of the black sea. the system as a whole is referred to as the pontic mountains do xc x fukaradeniz da xc x flar xc xb . in the west the system has been fractured by the faulting that produced the turkish straits in thrace the ergene lowlands are among the largest in the country and the main mountain range xe x x the y xc xb ld xc xb z istranca xe x x reaches only feet metres . lowlands also occur to the south of the sea of marmara and along the lower sakarya river east of the bosporus. high ridges trending east west rise abruptly from the black sea coast and the coastal plain is thus narrow opening out only in the deltas of the k xc xb z xc xb l and ye xc x fil rivers. these rivers break through the mountain barrier in a zone of weakness where summits are below feet metres dividing the pontic mountains into western and eastern sections. in the western section between the sakarya and k xc xb z xc xb l rivers there are four main ridges the k xc xbcre bolu ilgaz and k xc xb ro xc x flu mountains. east of the ye xc x fil the system is higher narrower and steeper. less than miles from the coast peaks rise to more than feet metres with a maximum elevation of feet metres in the ka xc xa kar range. separated by the narrow trough of the kelkit and xc x oruh river valleys stands a second ridge that rises above feet metres . p the southern folded zone the southern folded zone occupies the southern third of the country from the aegean to the gulf of iskenderun from which it extends to the northeast and east around the northern side of the arabian platform. over most of its length the mediterranean coastal plain is narrow but there are two major lowland embayments. the antalya plain extends inland some miles km from the gulf of antalya the adana plain measuring roughly by miles by km comprises the combined deltas of the seyhan and ceyhan rivers. the mountain system falls into two main parts. west of antalya a complex series of ridges with a north south trend reaches to feet to metres but the most prominent feature is the massive taurus toros mountain system running parallel to the mediterranean coast and extending along the southern border. there crest lines are often above feet metres and several peaks exceed feet metres . p in the eastern third of the country the northern and southern fold systems converge to produce an extensive area of predominantly mountainous terrain with pockets of relatively level land confined to valleys and enclosed basins as are found around malatya elaz xc xb xc x f and mu xc x f . p page of next page the central massif learn more in these related britannica articles pottery turkish a branch of the seljuq turks occupied anatolia from to and was succeeded by the ottoman turks who first extended their lands westward conquering byzantium in and in the th century becoming masters of much of southeastern europe and the lands xe x xa education colonialism and its consequences mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk of turkey who was determined to create a modern state initiated a dramatic program of social and cultural change in which education played an important role. he closed the religious schools promoted coeducation prepared new curricula emphasized vocational and technical education launched a compulsory adult education xe x xa islamic arts dance as entertainment the turks considered dancing a profession for the lowborn as a result most dancers were members of minority groups xe x x mostly greeks jews and armenians. this judgment has usually applied to the status of professional dancers and indeed to most professional entertainers at most periods and in most xe x xa islamic arts the modern period xe x xa military bands and conservatories in turkey and in persia and giuseppe verdi xe x x s opera aida inaugurated the opera house in cairo in . expanding contact with western music caused certain alterations in traditional musical styles. there was a widespread musical renaissance with two main centres the leading school in xe x xa asia water resources xe x xa the one hand and upstream turkey on the other concerns the tigris and euphrates rivers whose headwaters lie in turkey . turkey had already built several dams including the atat xc xbcrk dam on the two rivers and construction has been underway on two more dams on the euphrates at birecik and kargam xc xb xc x f xe x xa additional media index entries more about turkey references found in britannica articles assorted references flag history in flag of turkey art and architecture dance and theatre in islamic arts dance as entertainment embroidery in embroidery islamic architecture in islam architecture music in islamic arts the modern period pottery in pottery turkish commerce industry and mining emery production in emery mohair fibre production in mohair customs and traditions dress in dress the ottoman empire gregorian and muslim calendar in calendar the muslim calendar view more additional reading external websites central intelligence agency the world factbook turkey maps of world turkey europe lonely planet turkey national geographic kids turkey britannica websites articles from britannica encyclopedias for elementary and high school students. turkey children s encyclopedia ages turkey student encyclopedia ages and up article history article contributors feedback corrections updates help us improve this article contact our editors with your feedback. turkey flag of turkey national anthem of turkey official name t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti republic of turkey form of government multiparty republic with one legislative house grand national assembly of turkey head of state and government president recep tayyip erdo xc x fan capital ankara official language turkish official religion none monetary unit turkish lira tl currency exchange rate usd equals . turkish lira population est. population rank population projection total area sq mi total area sq km density persons per sq mi . density persons per sq km . urban rural population urban . rural . life expectancy at birth male xe x x . years female xe x x . years literacy percentage of population age and over literate male female . gni u.s. xe x x gni per capita u.s. amendments to the constitution passed in april and implemented in july expanded the grand national assembly from to seats eliminated the post of prime minister and expanded the role of the president. related people constantine vii porphyrogenitus tansu xc x iller xc xb smet xc xb n xc xb n xc xbc xc x e xc xbckr xc xbc saraco xc x flu enver pa xc x fa st. john chrysostom ziya g xc xb kalp alexius i comnenus theodore metochites epictetus ad related places kars giresun bursa xc xb skenderun k xc xb r xc xb kkale xc x eanl xc xb urfa k xc xbctahya eski xc x fehir xc x orum kayseri ad related topics ataturk dam council of constantinople battle of granicus group of iran in a country at a crossroads jel xc x l xc xab revolts treaty of ankara battle of poson council of nicaea erci xc x f van earthquake of ad featured on britannica demystified society what is gaslighting list technology influential computer programming languages quiz literature language writers of the harlem renaissance spotlight science the fermi paradox where are all the aliens introduction quick facts land relief the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif the arabian platform drainage rivers lakes soils climate overview climatic regions plant and animal life vegetation fauna settlement patterns people language and religion demographic trends economy resources agriculture industry trade transportation administration and social conditions government constitution political parties foreign policy education health and welfare education health and welfare cultural life daily life work dress religious practice social roles and kinship male and female roles marriage and family life social change arts and media sports and recreation history mustafa kemal and the turkish war of independence xe x x the fundamental law and abolition of the sultanate declaration of the turkish republic turkey under mustafa kemal government opposition kemalist policies turkey after kemal xe x x catat xc xbcrk xe x x d world war ii and the postwar era xe x x turkey under the democrats xe x x the economy political repressions the military coup of the national unity committee the constitution of the ascendancy of the right xe x x political developments s to xe x x s military intervention and coalition governments the s the constitution the kurdish conflict the s challenges of the st century turkey under the akp negotiations with the pkk foreign affairs since edit mode turkey tips for editing leave edit mode submit tips for editing we welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. you can make it easier for us to review and hopefully publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. encyclop xc xa dia britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. you may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. any text you add should be original not copied from other sources. at the bottom of the article feel free to list any sources that support your changes so that we can fully understand their context. internet urls are the best. your contribution may be further edited by our staff and its publication is subject to our final approval. unfortunately our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. submit thank you for your contribution our editors will review what you ve submitted and if it meets our criteria we ll add it to the article. please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. uh oh there was a problem with your submission. please try again later. close keep exploring britannica russian empire russian empire historical empire founded on november october old style when the russian xe x xa read this article scott morrison scott morrison australian conservative politician who became leader of the liberal party and prime minister xe x xa read this article china china country of east asia. it is the largest of all asian countries and has the largest population xe x xa read this article view more stay connected facebook twitter youtube instagram pinterest newsletters about us about our ads partner program contact us privacy policy terms of use xc xa encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. menu home spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies login join contents contents page of turkey view all media images videos and audio media print print please select which sections you would like to print table of contents cite share share facebook twitter google linkedin email feedback feedback corrections updates omissions let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article requires login . select feedback type select a type required factual correction spelling grammar correction link correction additional information other submit feedback if you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article you can go to edit mode requires login . thank you for your feedback our editors will review what you xe x x ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. join britannica s publishing partner program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work share share share facebook twitter google linkedin email search email this page email to email from subject comments cancel send xc x close download our free chrome extension britannica insights . facts matter and britannica insights makes it easier to find them. install for chrome now learn more b begin ngs newrelicrumheader end ngs newrelicrumheader googleoff all family see badges logout googleon all check if likes go here articles turkey hagia sophia is a museum in istanbul turkey s largest city. photograph by ahmet ihsan ariturk dreamstime whirling dervishes perform in turkey. photograph by hsan gercelman dreamstime the white cliffs in pamukkale in western turkey are made of a calcium rich mineral called travertine. photograph by nikolai sorokin dreamstime istanbul the largest city in turkey is built on land in the bosporus seaway. photograph by nikolai sorokin dreamstime turkey is a resting location for birds on their migratory journey between their summer and winter homes. photograph by volkan akgul dreamstime fast facts continent europe and asia official name xc xa republic of turkey form of government xc xa parliamentary democracy capital ankara area xc xa square miles square kilometers population xc xa official language turkish money turkish lira turkish flag map of turkey geography turkey is a large peninsula that bridges the continents of europe and asia. turkey is surrounded on three sides by the black sea the mediterranean sea and the aegean sea. istanbul the largest city in turkey is built on land in the bosporus seaway. the city is partly in europe and partly in asia. turkey is larger than the state of texas . xc xa turkey is one of the most earthquake prone areas on earth and has suffered from earthquakes in the past years. the north anatolian fault extends hundreds of miles from the sea of marmara in the western part of the country to the eastern anatolian highlands. the fault moves back and forth about inches centimeters a year. xc xa turkey s highest mountain mount ararat has two peaks with great ararat reaching feet meters . the mountain is considered sacred by many people and is believed to be where noah beached his ark after the great flood. people culture the turkish people are from diverse backgrounds a reminder of the many different groups that conquered turkey over thousands of years. the majority of the population lives in cities and children who want to go to high school must move to a city. the people are primarily sunni muslim. one fifth of the population is kurdish. xc xa children who live in the european side of istanbul may cross the bosporus by ferry to visit grandparents in asia. turks are family oriented and are very hospitable people. they invite visitors to their homes and make sure they have something to eat and drink before they leave. one of their favorite meals is kebab made from grilled lamb. their diet includes lamb eggplant and yogurt. a sweet flavored candy with rose petals called turkish delight or lokum is sold in many flavors and colors. xc xa to find work about two million turks are currently guest workers in germany and have formed their own communities there. xc xa soccer is the most popular sport in turkey. there are three popular teams based in istanbul. turks excel at weightlifting and a form of wrestling called turkish wrestling. nature turkey is a resting location for birds on their migratory journey between their summer and winter homes. they flock to kus golu or bird lake in a protected national forest that is surrounded by reed marshes. the first national park in turkey opened in . xc xa today there are parks where rare species and their habitats are protected. several species are at risk including the northern bald eagle which is critically endangered. at one time turkey was home to jackals lynx wolves and bears but those animal species are rare now. the turkish horned viper snake has spikelike scales that poke upward near their eyes. xc xa once known as cotton castle the white cliffs in pamukkale in western turkey are made of a calcium rich mineral called travertine. the cliffs look like a sheet of ice covering a hillside from a distance. a spring flows from pool to pool. the cascade is . miles . kilometers long. turkish lira photograph by ahmet ihsan ariturk dreamstime xc xa government the prime minister is considered the head of the government and is in charge of the country. the grand national assembly is a member body that is elected by the people. the assembly elects the president a position that is largely ceremonial. xc xa turkey was a founding member of the united nations which was created after world war ii. turkey has been an associate member of the european union since but it has not been accepted as a full member. turkey is a member of the north atlantic treaty organization nato which is a defense alliance. because of its location in the middle east turkey is strategic in world affairs. xc xa kurds in southern turkey started a guerrilla war in to create a kurdish state. in turkish troops invaded northern iraq to attack kurds. history turkey is home to one of the earliest settlements in the world. built years ago catal hoyuk was a labyrinth of mud homes joined together. there were no streets in between so people had to enter the homes through holes in the roof xc xa about years ago the hittites created an empire in the central part of what is now called turkey in anatolia. they ruled for hundreds of years. the trojan war took place when the hittites were losing power. the ruins of the city of troy are believed to be in the city of hissarlik in anatolia. xc xa king midas ruled western turkey around b.c. in b.c. alexander the great took anatolia under macedonian greek rule until rome took over and anatolia became part of roman asia minor. in a.d. constantine became the roman emperor and formed a new capital called constantinople. after the fall of the roman empire it became part of the byzantine empire. xc xa the city of constantinople was conquered by the ottomans in and turkey became part of the ottoman empire. after world war i the country was invaded by greece which led to the turkish war of independence in led by mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk. in the turkish assembly declared turkey a republic. xc xa the city formally became istanbul in . turkey became a secular country meaning there is a separation between religion and government. women gained the right to vote in . go global check out the interactive map and discover more countries. take a virtual road trip to all states get facts photos and videos. next united states previous thailand dive deeper googleoff all about us contact us visit nationalgeographic.org subscribe privacy policy terms of service xc xa national geographic society. xc xa national geographic partners llc. xc xa all rights reserved. googleon all begin ngs newrelicrumfooter end ngs newrelicrumfooter b encyclop xc x dia britannica start your free trial log in xc xb join spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies start your free trial search britannica what are you looking for search click here to search browse popular topics jonestown massacre apollo martin luther roe v. wade history of technology bring fact checked results to the top of your browser search. learn more. turkey written by malcolm edward yapp john c. dewdney last updated sep see article history alternative titles republic of turkey t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti before article turkey country that occupies a unique geographic position lying partly in asia and partly in europe . throughout its history it has acted as both a barrier and a bridge between the two continents. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. the castle of st. peter at bodrum turkey on the aegean coast. xc xa monticelllo dreamstime.com ml turkey is situated at the crossroads of the balkans caucasus middle east and eastern mediterranean . it is among the larger countries of the region in terms of territory and population and its land area is greater than that of any european state. nearly all of the country is in asia comprising the oblong peninsula of asia minor xe x x also known as anatolia anadolu xe x x and in the east part of a mountainous region sometimes known as the armenian highland . the remainder xe x x turkish thrace trakya xe x x lies in the extreme southeastern part of europe a tiny remnant of an empire that once extended over much of the balkans. p turkey encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the country has a north south extent that ranges from about to miles to km and it stretches about miles from west to east. turkey is bounded on the north by the black sea on the northeast by georgia and armenia on the east by azerbaijan and iran on the southeast by iraq and syria on the southwest and west by the mediterranean sea and the aegean sea and on the northwest by greece and bulgaria . the capital is ankara and its largest city and seaport is istanbul . p turkey overview of turkey. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz time lapse video of istanbul. geoff tompkinson gtimage.com istanbul take a video tour of istanbul. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz ml of a total boundary length of some miles km about three fourths is maritime including coastlines along the black sea the aegean and the mediterranean as well as the narrows that link the black and aegean seas. these narrows xe x x which include the bosporus the sea of marmara and the dardanelles xe x x are known collectively as the turkish straits turkey xe x x s control of the straits the only outlet from the black sea has been a major factor in its relations with other states. most of the islands along the aegean coast are greek only the islands of g xc xb k xc xa eada and bozcaada remain in turkish hands. the maritime boundary with greece has been a source of dispute between the two countries on numerous occasions since world war ii . p turkey time lapse video of the northern black sea coast of turkey. piotr wancerz timelapse media boats on the bosporus at istanbul. xc xa faraways shutterstock.com ml a long succession of political entities existed in asia minor over the centuries. turkmen tribes invaded anatolia in the th century ce founding the seljuq empire during the th century the ottoman empire began a long expansion reaching its peak during the th century. the modern turkish republic founded in after the collapse of the ottoman empire is a nationalist secular parliamentary democracy . after a period of one party rule under its founder mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk and his successor turkish governments since the s have been produced by multiparty elections based on universal adult suffrage. p the ottoman empire at its greatest extent. encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml land relief turkey is a predominantly mountainous country and true lowland is confined to the coastal fringes. about one fourth of the surface has an elevation above feet metres and less than two fifths lies below feet metres . mountain crests exceed feet metres in many places particularly in the east where turkey xe x x s highest mountain mount ararat a xc x fr xc xb reaches feet metres close to the borders with armenia and iran. in the southeast the uludoruk peak reaches feet metres though further west the demirkaz xc xb k peak feet metres and mount aydos feet metres are also significant peaks. steep slopes are common throughout the country and flat or gently sloping land makes up barely one sixth of the total area. these relief features affect other aspects of the physical environment producing climates often much harsher than might be expected for a country of turkey xe x x s latitude and reducing the availability and productivity of agricultural land. structurally the country lies within the geologically young folded mountain zone of eurasia which in turkey trends predominantly east to west. the geology of turkey is complex with sedimentary rocks ranging from paleozoic to quaternary numerous intrusions and extensive areas of volcanic material. four main regions can be identified the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif and the arabian platform. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the northern folded zone the northern folded zone comprises a series of mountain ridges increasing in elevation toward the east that occupy a belt about to miles to km wide immediately south of the black sea. the system as a whole is referred to as the pontic mountains do xc x fukaradeniz da xc x flar xc xb . in the west the system has been fractured by the faulting that produced the turkish straits in thrace the ergene lowlands are among the largest in the country and the main mountain range xe x x the y xc xb ld xc xb z istranca xe x x reaches only feet metres . lowlands also occur to the south of the sea of marmara and along the lower sakarya river east of the bosporus. high ridges trending east west rise abruptly from the black sea coast and the coastal plain is thus narrow opening out only in the deltas of the k xc xb z xc xb l and ye xc x fil rivers. these rivers break through the mountain barrier in a zone of weakness where summits are below feet metres dividing the pontic mountains into western and eastern sections. in the western section between the sakarya and k xc xb z xc xb l rivers there are four main ridges the k xc xbcre bolu ilgaz and k xc xb ro xc x flu mountains. east of the ye xc x fil the system is higher narrower and steeper. less than miles from the coast peaks rise to more than feet metres with a maximum elevation of feet metres in the ka xc xa kar range. separated by the narrow trough of the kelkit and xc x oruh river valleys stands a second ridge that rises above feet metres . p the southern folded zone the southern folded zone occupies the southern third of the country from the aegean to the gulf of iskenderun from which it extends to the northeast and east around the northern side of the arabian platform. over most of its length the mediterranean coastal plain is narrow but there are two major lowland embayments. the antalya plain extends inland some miles km from the gulf of antalya the adana plain measuring roughly by miles by km comprises the combined deltas of the seyhan and ceyhan rivers. the mountain system falls into two main parts. west of antalya a complex series of ridges with a north south trend reaches to feet to metres but the most prominent feature is the massive taurus toros mountain system running parallel to the mediterranean coast and extending along the southern border. there crest lines are often above feet metres and several peaks exceed feet metres . p in the eastern third of the country the northern and southern fold systems converge to produce an extensive area of predominantly mountainous terrain with pockets of relatively level land confined to valleys and enclosed basins as are found around malatya elaz xc xb xc x f and mu xc x f . p page of next page the central massif learn more in these related britannica articles pottery turkish a branch of the seljuq turks occupied anatolia from to and was succeeded by the ottoman turks who first extended their lands westward conquering byzantium in and in the th century becoming masters of much of southeastern europe and the lands xe x xa education colonialism and its consequences mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk of turkey who was determined to create a modern state initiated a dramatic program of social and cultural change in which education played an important role. he closed the religious schools promoted coeducation prepared new curricula emphasized vocational and technical education launched a compulsory adult education xe x xa islamic arts dance as entertainment the turks considered dancing a profession for the lowborn as a result most dancers were members of minority groups xe x x mostly greeks jews and armenians. this judgment has usually applied to the status of professional dancers and indeed to most professional entertainers at most periods and in most xe x xa islamic arts the modern period xe x xa military bands and conservatories in turkey and in persia and giuseppe verdi xe x x s opera aida inaugurated the opera house in cairo in . expanding contact with western music caused certain alterations in traditional musical styles. there was a widespread musical renaissance with two main centres the leading school in xe x xa asia water resources xe x xa the one hand and upstream turkey on the other concerns the tigris and euphrates rivers whose headwaters lie in turkey . turkey had already built several dams including the atat xc xbcrk dam on the two rivers and construction has been underway on two more dams on the euphrates at birecik and kargam xc xb xc x f xe x xa additional media index entries more about turkey references found in britannica articles assorted references flag history in flag of turkey art and architecture dance and theatre in islamic arts dance as entertainment embroidery in embroidery islamic architecture in islam architecture music in islamic arts the modern period pottery in pottery turkish commerce industry and mining emery production in emery mohair fibre production in mohair customs and traditions dress in dress the ottoman empire gregorian and muslim calendar in calendar the muslim calendar view more additional reading external websites central intelligence agency the world factbook turkey maps of world turkey europe lonely planet turkey national geographic kids turkey britannica websites articles from britannica encyclopedias for elementary and high school students. turkey children s encyclopedia ages turkey student encyclopedia ages and up article history article contributors feedback corrections updates help us improve this article contact our editors with your feedback. turkey flag of turkey national anthem of turkey official name t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti republic of turkey form of government multiparty republic with one legislative house grand national assembly of turkey head of state and government president recep tayyip erdo xc x fan capital ankara official language turkish official religion none monetary unit turkish lira tl currency exchange rate usd equals . turkish lira population est. population rank population projection total area sq mi total area sq km density persons per sq mi . density persons per sq km . urban rural population urban . rural . life expectancy at birth male xe x x . years female xe x x . years literacy percentage of population age and over literate male female . gni u.s. xe x x gni per capita u.s. amendments to the constitution passed in april and implemented in july expanded the grand national assembly from to seats eliminated the post of prime minister and expanded the role of the president. related people constantine vii porphyrogenitus tansu xc x iller xc xb smet xc xb n xc xb n xc xbc xc x e xc xbckr xc xbc saraco xc x flu enver pa xc x fa st. john chrysostom ziya g xc xb kalp alexius i comnenus theodore metochites epictetus ad related places kars giresun bursa xc xb skenderun k xc xb r xc xb kkale xc x eanl xc xb urfa k xc xbctahya eski xc x fehir xc x orum kayseri ad related topics ataturk dam council of constantinople battle of granicus group of iran in a country at a crossroads jel xc x l xc xab revolts treaty of ankara battle of poson council of nicaea erci xc x f van earthquake of ad featured on britannica demystified society what is gaslighting list technology influential computer programming languages quiz literature language writers of the harlem renaissance spotlight science the fermi paradox where are all the aliens introduction quick facts land relief the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif the arabian platform drainage rivers lakes soils climate overview climatic regions plant and animal life vegetation fauna settlement patterns people language and religion demographic trends economy resources agriculture industry trade transportation administration and social conditions government constitution political parties foreign policy education health and welfare education health and welfare cultural life daily life work dress religious practice social roles and kinship male and female roles marriage and family life social change arts and media sports and recreation history mustafa kemal and the turkish war of independence xe x x the fundamental law and abolition of the sultanate declaration of the turkish republic turkey under mustafa kemal government opposition kemalist policies turkey after kemal xe x x catat xc xbcrk xe x x d world war ii and the postwar era xe x x turkey under the democrats xe x x the economy political repressions the military coup of the national unity committee the constitution of the ascendancy of the right xe x x political developments s to xe x x s military intervention and coalition governments the s the constitution the kurdish conflict the s challenges of the st century turkey under the akp negotiations with the pkk foreign affairs since edit mode turkey tips for editing leave edit mode submit tips for editing we welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. you can make it easier for us to review and hopefully publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. encyclop xc xa dia britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. you may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. any text you add should be original not copied from other sources. at the bottom of the article feel free to list any sources that support your changes so that we can fully understand their context. internet urls are the best. your contribution may be further edited by our staff and its publication is subject to our final approval. unfortunately our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. submit thank you for your contribution our editors will review what you ve submitted and if it meets our criteria we ll add it to the article. please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. uh oh there was a problem with your submission. please try again later. close keep exploring britannica russian empire russian empire historical empire founded on november october old style when the russian xe x xa read this article scott morrison scott morrison australian conservative politician who became leader of the liberal party and prime minister xe x xa read this article china china country of east asia. it is the largest of all asian countries and has the largest population xe x xa read this article view more stay connected facebook twitter youtube instagram pinterest newsletters about us about our ads partner program contact us privacy policy terms of use xc xa encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. menu home spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies login join contents contents page of turkey view all media images videos and audio media print print please select which sections you would like to print table of contents cite share share facebook twitter google linkedin email feedback feedback corrections updates omissions let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article requires login . select feedback type select a type required factual correction spelling grammar correction link correction additional information other submit feedback if you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article you can go to edit mode requires login . thank you for your feedback our editors will review what you xe x x ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. join britannica s publishing partner program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work share share share facebook twitter google linkedin email search email this page email to email from subject comments cancel send xc x close download our free chrome extension britannica insights . facts matter and britannica insights makes it easier to find them. install for chrome now learn more b encyclop xc x dia britannica start your free trial log in xc xb join spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies start your free trial search britannica what are you looking for search click here to search browse popular topics jonestown massacre apollo martin luther roe v. wade history of technology bring fact checked results to the top of your browser search. learn more. turkey written by malcolm edward yapp john c. dewdney last updated sep see article history alternative titles republic of turkey t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti before article turkey country that occupies a unique geographic position lying partly in asia and partly in europe . throughout its history it has acted as both a barrier and a bridge between the two continents. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. the castle of st. peter at bodrum turkey on the aegean coast. xc xa monticelllo dreamstime.com ml turkey is situated at the crossroads of the balkans caucasus middle east and eastern mediterranean . it is among the larger countries of the region in terms of territory and population and its land area is greater than that of any european state. nearly all of the country is in asia comprising the oblong peninsula of asia minor xe x x also known as anatolia anadolu xe x x and in the east part of a mountainous region sometimes known as the armenian highland . the remainder xe x x turkish thrace trakya xe x x lies in the extreme southeastern part of europe a tiny remnant of an empire that once extended over much of the balkans. p turkey encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the country has a north south extent that ranges from about to miles to km and it stretches about miles from west to east. turkey is bounded on the north by the black sea on the northeast by georgia and armenia on the east by azerbaijan and iran on the southeast by iraq and syria on the southwest and west by the mediterranean sea and the aegean sea and on the northwest by greece and bulgaria . the capital is ankara and its largest city and seaport is istanbul . p turkey overview of turkey. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz time lapse video of istanbul. geoff tompkinson gtimage.com istanbul take a video tour of istanbul. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz ml of a total boundary length of some miles km about three fourths is maritime including coastlines along the black sea the aegean and the mediterranean as well as the narrows that link the black and aegean seas. these narrows xe x x which include the bosporus the sea of marmara and the dardanelles xe x x are known collectively as the turkish straits turkey xe x x s control of the straits the only outlet from the black sea has been a major factor in its relations with other states. most of the islands along the aegean coast are greek only the islands of g xc xb k xc xa eada and bozcaada remain in turkish hands. the maritime boundary with greece has been a source of dispute between the two countries on numerous occasions since world war ii . p turkey time lapse video of the northern black sea coast of turkey. piotr wancerz timelapse media boats on the bosporus at istanbul. xc xa faraways shutterstock.com ml a long succession of political entities existed in asia minor over the centuries. turkmen tribes invaded anatolia in the th century ce founding the seljuq empire during the th century the ottoman empire began a long expansion reaching its peak during the th century. the modern turkish republic founded in after the collapse of the ottoman empire is a nationalist secular parliamentary democracy . after a period of one party rule under its founder mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk and his successor turkish governments since the s have been produced by multiparty elections based on universal adult suffrage. p the ottoman empire at its greatest extent. encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml land relief turkey is a predominantly mountainous country and true lowland is confined to the coastal fringes. about one fourth of the surface has an elevation above feet metres and less than two fifths lies below feet metres . mountain crests exceed feet metres in many places particularly in the east where turkey xe x x s highest mountain mount ararat a xc x fr xc xb reaches feet metres close to the borders with armenia and iran. in the southeast the uludoruk peak reaches feet metres though further west the demirkaz xc xb k peak feet metres and mount aydos feet metres are also significant peaks. steep slopes are common throughout the country and flat or gently sloping land makes up barely one sixth of the total area. these relief features affect other aspects of the physical environment producing climates often much harsher than might be expected for a country of turkey xe x x s latitude and reducing the availability and productivity of agricultural land. structurally the country lies within the geologically young folded mountain zone of eurasia which in turkey trends predominantly east to west. the geology of turkey is complex with sedimentary rocks ranging from paleozoic to quaternary numerous intrusions and extensive areas of volcanic material. four main regions can be identified the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif and the arabian platform. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the northern folded zone the northern folded zone comprises a series of mountain ridges increasing in elevation toward the east that occupy a belt about to miles to km wide immediately south of the black sea. the system as a whole is referred to as the pontic mountains do xc x fukaradeniz da xc x flar xc xb . in the west the system has been fractured by the faulting that produced the turkish straits in thrace the ergene lowlands are among the largest in the country and the main mountain range xe x x the y xc xb ld xc xb z istranca xe x x reaches only feet metres . lowlands also occur to the south of the sea of marmara and along the lower sakarya river east of the bosporus. high ridges trending east west rise abruptly from the black sea coast and the coastal plain is thus narrow opening out only in the deltas of the k xc xb z xc xb l and ye xc x fil rivers. these rivers break through the mountain barrier in a zone of weakness where summits are below feet metres dividing the pontic mountains into western and eastern sections. in the western section between the sakarya and k xc xb z xc xb l rivers there are four main ridges the k xc xbcre bolu ilgaz and k xc xb ro xc x flu mountains. east of the ye xc x fil the system is higher narrower and steeper. less than miles from the coast peaks rise to more than feet metres with a maximum elevation of feet metres in the ka xc xa kar range. separated by the narrow trough of the kelkit and xc x oruh river valleys stands a second ridge that rises above feet metres . p the southern folded zone the southern folded zone occupies the southern third of the country from the aegean to the gulf of iskenderun from which it extends to the northeast and east around the northern side of the arabian platform. over most of its length the mediterranean coastal plain is narrow but there are two major lowland embayments. the antalya plain extends inland some miles km from the gulf of antalya the adana plain measuring roughly by miles by km comprises the combined deltas of the seyhan and ceyhan rivers. the mountain system falls into two main parts. west of antalya a complex series of ridges with a north south trend reaches to feet to metres but the most prominent feature is the massive taurus toros mountain system running parallel to the mediterranean coast and extending along the southern border. there crest lines are often above feet metres and several peaks exceed feet metres . p in the eastern third of the country the northern and southern fold systems converge to produce an extensive area of predominantly mountainous terrain with pockets of relatively level land confined to valleys and enclosed basins as are found around malatya elaz xc xb xc x f and mu xc x f . p page of next page the central massif learn more in these related britannica articles pottery turkish a branch of the seljuq turks occupied anatolia from to and was succeeded by the ottoman turks who first extended their lands westward conquering byzantium in and in the th century becoming masters of much of southeastern europe and the lands xe x xa education colonialism and its consequences mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk of turkey who was determined to create a modern state initiated a dramatic program of social and cultural change in which education played an important role. he closed the religious schools promoted coeducation prepared new curricula emphasized vocational and technical education launched a compulsory adult education xe x xa islamic arts dance as entertainment the turks considered dancing a profession for the lowborn as a result most dancers were members of minority groups xe x x mostly greeks jews and armenians. this judgment has usually applied to the status of professional dancers and indeed to most professional entertainers at most periods and in most xe x xa islamic arts the modern period xe x xa military bands and conservatories in turkey and in persia and giuseppe verdi xe x x s opera aida inaugurated the opera house in cairo in . expanding contact with western music caused certain alterations in traditional musical styles. there was a widespread musical renaissance with two main centres the leading school in xe x xa asia water resources xe x xa the one hand and upstream turkey on the other concerns the tigris and euphrates rivers whose headwaters lie in turkey . turkey had already built several dams including the atat xc xbcrk dam on the two rivers and construction has been underway on two more dams on the euphrates at birecik and kargam xc xb xc x f xe x xa additional media index entries more about turkey references found in britannica articles assorted references flag history in flag of turkey art and architecture dance and theatre in islamic arts dance as entertainment embroidery in embroidery islamic architecture in islam architecture music in islamic arts the modern period pottery in pottery turkish commerce industry and mining emery production in emery mohair fibre production in mohair customs and traditions dress in dress the ottoman empire gregorian and muslim calendar in calendar the muslim calendar view more additional reading external websites central intelligence agency the world factbook turkey maps of world turkey europe lonely planet turkey national geographic kids turkey britannica websites articles from britannica encyclopedias for elementary and high school students. turkey children s encyclopedia ages turkey student encyclopedia ages and up article history article contributors feedback corrections updates help us improve this article contact our editors with your feedback. turkey flag of turkey national anthem of turkey official name t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti republic of turkey form of government multiparty republic with one legislative house grand national assembly of turkey head of state and government president recep tayyip erdo xc x fan capital ankara official language turkish official religion none monetary unit turkish lira tl currency exchange rate usd equals . turkish lira population est. population rank population projection total area sq mi total area sq km density persons per sq mi . density persons per sq km . urban rural population urban . rural . life expectancy at birth male xe x x . years female xe x x . years literacy percentage of population age and over literate male female . gni u.s. xe x x gni per capita u.s. amendments to the constitution passed in april and implemented in july expanded the grand national assembly from to seats eliminated the post of prime minister and expanded the role of the president. related people constantine vii porphyrogenitus tansu xc x iller xc xb smet xc xb n xc xb n xc xbc xc x e xc xbckr xc xbc saraco xc x flu enver pa xc x fa st. john chrysostom ziya g xc xb kalp alexius i comnenus theodore metochites epictetus ad related places kars giresun bursa xc xb skenderun k xc xb r xc xb kkale xc x eanl xc xb urfa k xc xbctahya eski xc x fehir xc x orum kayseri ad related topics ataturk dam council of constantinople battle of granicus group of iran in a country at a crossroads jel xc x l xc xab revolts treaty of ankara battle of poson council of nicaea erci xc x f van earthquake of ad featured on britannica demystified society what is gaslighting list technology influential computer programming languages quiz literature language writers of the harlem renaissance spotlight science the fermi paradox where are all the aliens introduction quick facts land relief the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif the arabian platform drainage rivers lakes soils climate overview climatic regions plant and animal life vegetation fauna settlement patterns people language and religion demographic trends economy resources agriculture industry trade transportation administration and social conditions government constitution political parties foreign policy education health and welfare education health and welfare cultural life daily life work dress religious practice social roles and kinship male and female roles marriage and family life social change arts and media sports and recreation history mustafa kemal and the turkish war of independence xe x x the fundamental law and abolition of the sultanate declaration of the turkish republic turkey under mustafa kemal government opposition kemalist policies turkey after kemal xe x x catat xc xbcrk xe x x d world war ii and the postwar era xe x x turkey under the democrats xe x x the economy political repressions the military coup of the national unity committee the constitution of the ascendancy of the right xe x x political developments s to xe x x s military intervention and coalition governments the s the constitution the kurdish conflict the s challenges of the st century turkey under the akp negotiations with the pkk foreign affairs since edit mode turkey tips for editing leave edit mode submit tips for editing we welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. you can make it easier for us to review and hopefully publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. encyclop xc xa dia britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. you may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. any text you add should be original not copied from other sources. at the bottom of the article feel free to list any sources that support your changes so that we can fully understand their context. internet urls are the best. your contribution may be further edited by our staff and its publication is subject to our final approval. unfortunately our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. submit thank you for your contribution our editors will review what you ve submitted and if it meets our criteria we ll add it to the article. please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. uh oh there was a problem with your submission. please try again later. close keep exploring britannica russian empire russian empire historical empire founded on november october old style when the russian xe x xa read this article scott morrison scott morrison australian conservative politician who became leader of the liberal party and prime minister xe x xa read this article china china country of east asia. it is the largest of all asian countries and has the largest population xe x xa read this article view more stay connected facebook twitter youtube instagram pinterest newsletters about us about our ads partner program contact us privacy policy terms of use xc xa encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. menu home spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies login join contents contents page of turkey view all media images videos and audio media print print please select which sections you would like to print table of contents cite share share facebook twitter google linkedin email feedback feedback corrections updates omissions let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article requires login . select feedback type select a type required factual correction spelling grammar correction link correction additional information other submit feedback if you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article you can go to edit mode requires login . thank you for your feedback our editors will review what you xe x x ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. join britannica s publishing partner program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work share share share facebook twitter google linkedin email search email this page email to email from subject comments cancel send xc x close download our free chrome extension britannica insights . facts matter and britannica insights makes it easier to find them. install for chrome now learn more