b encyclop xc x dia britannica start your free trial log in xc xb join spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies start your free trial search britannica what are you looking for search click here to search browse popular topics jonestown massacre apollo martin luther roe v. wade history of technology bring fact checked results to the top of your browser search. learn more. flag of turkey written by whitney smith see article history before article national flag consisting of a red field background with a central white star and crescent . the flag has a width to length ratio of approximately to . various myths are associated with the symbolism of the red colour and the star and crescent but none really explains their origins. although the star and crescent are often seen as typical muslim symbols in fact they have a history long predating the rise of islam. ancient civilizations throughout the middle east used a crescent moon as a religious symbol and the ancient city of byzantium was dedicated to the moon goddess diana . a star emblematic of the virgin mary was added to diana xe x x s crescent symbol when emperor constantine i made christianity the official faith of the roman empire and renamed the city constantinople in his own honour. the crescent and star became associated with islam when the muslim turkic peoples of central asia captured the anatolian peninsula and eventually constantinople and added the crescent and star of the latter to their own plain red flags. there were several turkish flags throughout the centuries of the ottoman empire most of them incorporating the crescent and star and the colours red or green. in june the flag now used as the turkish national flag was established for the navy although its star had eight points instead of the current five. the reduction in the number of star points was made about . that flag design was reconfirmed as the turkish national banner on june following the revolution led by atat xc xbcrk who had established a republic in after the collapse of the ottoman dynasty. p whitney smith end of content learn more in these related britannica articles turkey turkey country that occupies a unique geographic position lying partly in asia and partly in europe. throughout its history it has acted as both a barrier and a bridge between the two continents. turkey is situated at xe x xa crescent crescent political military and religious emblem of the byzantine and turkish empires and later and more generally of all isl xc x mic countries. the moon in its first quarter was a religious symbol from earliest times and figured for xe x xa diana diana in roman religion goddess of wild animals and the hunt identified with the greek goddess artemis. her name is akin to the latin words dium xe x x csky xe x x d and dius xe x x cdaylight xe x x d . like her greek counterpart she was also a goddess of domestic animals. as a fertility deity she was invoked by xe x xa constantine i constantine i the first roman emperor to profess christianity. he not only initiated the evolution of the empire into xe x xa turkic peoples turkic peoples any of various peoples whose members speak languages belonging to the turkic subfamily of the altaic family of languages. they are historically and linguistically connected with the tujue the name given by the chinese to the nomadic people who in the th century ce founded an empire stretching xe x xa additional media article history article contributors related topics turkey flag ad similar topics flag of the united states of america flag of nepal flag of india flag of canada flag of australia flag of germany flag of france flag of new zealand flag of italy flag of mexico ad edit mode flag of turkey tips for editing leave edit mode submit tips for editing we welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. you can make it easier for us to review and hopefully publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. encyclop xc xa dia britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. you may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. any text you add should be original not copied from other sources. at the bottom of the article feel free to list any sources that support your changes so that we can fully understand their context. internet urls are the best. your contribution may be further edited by our staff and its publication is subject to our final approval. unfortunately our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. submit thank you for your contribution our editors will review what you ve submitted and if it meets our criteria we ll add it to the article. please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. uh oh there was a problem with your submission. please try again later. close keep exploring britannica united states united states country in north america a federal republic of states. besides the conterminous xe x xa read this article united kingdom united kingdom island country located off the northwestern coast of mainland europe. the united kingdom xe x xa read this article russia russia country that stretches over a vast expanse of eastern europe and northern asia. once the preeminent xe x xa read this article view more stay connected facebook twitter youtube instagram pinterest newsletters about us about our ads partner program contact us privacy policy terms of use xc xa encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. menu home spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies login join flag of turkey view all media image media print cite share share facebook twitter google linkedin email share share share facebook twitter google linkedin email search email this page email to email from subject comments cancel send xc x close download our free chrome extension britannica insights . facts matter and britannica insights makes it easier to find them. install for chrome now learn more b encyclop xc x dia britannica start your free trial log in xc xb join spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies start your free trial search britannica what are you looking for search click here to search browse popular topics jonestown massacre apollo martin luther roe v. wade history of technology bring fact checked results to the top of your browser search. learn more. turkey written by john c. dewdney malcolm edward yapp last updated sep see article history alternative titles republic of turkey t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti before article turkey country that occupies a unique geographic position lying partly in asia and partly in europe . throughout its history it has acted as both a barrier and a bridge between the two continents. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. the castle of st. peter at bodrum turkey on the aegean coast. xc xa monticelllo dreamstime.com ml turkey is situated at the crossroads of the balkans caucasus middle east and eastern mediterranean . it is among the larger countries of the region in terms of territory and population and its land area is greater than that of any european state. nearly all of the country is in asia comprising the oblong peninsula of asia minor xe x x also known as anatolia anadolu xe x x and in the east part of a mountainous region sometimes known as the armenian highland . the remainder xe x x turkish thrace trakya xe x x lies in the extreme southeastern part of europe a tiny remnant of an empire that once extended over much of the balkans. p turkey encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the country has a north south extent that ranges from about to miles to km and it stretches about miles from west to east. turkey is bounded on the north by the black sea on the northeast by georgia and armenia on the east by azerbaijan and iran on the southeast by iraq and syria on the southwest and west by the mediterranean sea and the aegean sea and on the northwest by greece and bulgaria . the capital is ankara and its largest city and seaport is istanbul . p turkey overview of turkey. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz time lapse video of istanbul. geoff tompkinson gtimage.com istanbul take a video tour of istanbul. contunico xc xa zdf enterprises gmbh mainz ml of a total boundary length of some miles km about three fourths is maritime including coastlines along the black sea the aegean and the mediterranean as well as the narrows that link the black and aegean seas. these narrows xe x x which include the bosporus the sea of marmara and the dardanelles xe x x are known collectively as the turkish straits turkey xe x x s control of the straits the only outlet from the black sea has been a major factor in its relations with other states. most of the islands along the aegean coast are greek only the islands of g xc xb k xc xa eada and bozcaada remain in turkish hands. the maritime boundary with greece has been a source of dispute between the two countries on numerous occasions since world war ii . p turkey time lapse video of the northern black sea coast of turkey. piotr wancerz timelapse media boats on the bosporus at istanbul. xc xa faraways shutterstock.com ml a long succession of political entities existed in asia minor over the centuries. turkmen tribes invaded anatolia in the th century ce founding the seljuq empire during the th century the ottoman empire began a long expansion reaching its peak during the th century. the modern turkish republic founded in after the collapse of the ottoman empire is a nationalist secular parliamentary democracy . after a period of one party rule under its founder mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk and his successor turkish governments since the s have been produced by multiparty elections based on universal adult suffrage. p the ottoman empire at its greatest extent. encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml land relief turkey is a predominantly mountainous country and true lowland is confined to the coastal fringes. about one fourth of the surface has an elevation above feet metres and less than two fifths lies below feet metres . mountain crests exceed feet metres in many places particularly in the east where turkey xe x x s highest mountain mount ararat a xc x fr xc xb reaches feet metres close to the borders with armenia and iran. in the southeast the uludoruk peak reaches feet metres though further west the demirkaz xc xb k peak feet metres and mount aydos feet metres are also significant peaks. steep slopes are common throughout the country and flat or gently sloping land makes up barely one sixth of the total area. these relief features affect other aspects of the physical environment producing climates often much harsher than might be expected for a country of turkey xe x x s latitude and reducing the availability and productivity of agricultural land. structurally the country lies within the geologically young folded mountain zone of eurasia which in turkey trends predominantly east to west. the geology of turkey is complex with sedimentary rocks ranging from paleozoic to quaternary numerous intrusions and extensive areas of volcanic material. four main regions can be identified the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif and the arabian platform. p encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. ml the northern folded zone the northern folded zone comprises a series of mountain ridges increasing in elevation toward the east that occupy a belt about to miles to km wide immediately south of the black sea. the system as a whole is referred to as the pontic mountains do xc x fukaradeniz da xc x flar xc xb . in the west the system has been fractured by the faulting that produced the turkish straits in thrace the ergene lowlands are among the largest in the country and the main mountain range xe x x the y xc xb ld xc xb z istranca xe x x reaches only feet metres . lowlands also occur to the south of the sea of marmara and along the lower sakarya river east of the bosporus. high ridges trending east west rise abruptly from the black sea coast and the coastal plain is thus narrow opening out only in the deltas of the k xc xb z xc xb l and ye xc x fil rivers. these rivers break through the mountain barrier in a zone of weakness where summits are below feet metres dividing the pontic mountains into western and eastern sections. in the western section between the sakarya and k xc xb z xc xb l rivers there are four main ridges the k xc xbcre bolu ilgaz and k xc xb ro xc x flu mountains. east of the ye xc x fil the system is higher narrower and steeper. less than miles from the coast peaks rise to more than feet metres with a maximum elevation of feet metres in the ka xc xa kar range. separated by the narrow trough of the kelkit and xc x oruh river valleys stands a second ridge that rises above feet metres . p the southern folded zone the southern folded zone occupies the southern third of the country from the aegean to the gulf of iskenderun from which it extends to the northeast and east around the northern side of the arabian platform. over most of its length the mediterranean coastal plain is narrow but there are two major lowland embayments. the antalya plain extends inland some miles km from the gulf of antalya the adana plain measuring roughly by miles by km comprises the combined deltas of the seyhan and ceyhan rivers. the mountain system falls into two main parts. west of antalya a complex series of ridges with a north south trend reaches to feet to metres but the most prominent feature is the massive taurus toros mountain system running parallel to the mediterranean coast and extending along the southern border. there crest lines are often above feet metres and several peaks exceed feet metres . p in the eastern third of the country the northern and southern fold systems converge to produce an extensive area of predominantly mountainous terrain with pockets of relatively level land confined to valleys and enclosed basins as are found around malatya elaz xc xb xc x f and mu xc x f . p page of next page the central massif learn more in these related britannica articles pottery turkish a branch of the seljuq turks occupied anatolia from to and was succeeded by the ottoman turks who first extended their lands westward conquering byzantium in and in the th century becoming masters of much of southeastern europe and the lands xe x xa education colonialism and its consequences mustafa kemal atat xc xbcrk of turkey who was determined to create a modern state initiated a dramatic program of social and cultural change in which education played an important role. he closed the religious schools promoted coeducation prepared new curricula emphasized vocational and technical education launched a compulsory adult education xe x xa islamic arts dance as entertainment the turks considered dancing a profession for the lowborn as a result most dancers were members of minority groups xe x x mostly greeks jews and armenians. this judgment has usually applied to the status of professional dancers and indeed to most professional entertainers at most periods and in most xe x xa islamic arts the modern period xe x xa military bands and conservatories in turkey and in persia and giuseppe verdi xe x x s opera aida inaugurated the opera house in cairo in . expanding contact with western music caused certain alterations in traditional musical styles. there was a widespread musical renaissance with two main centres the leading school in xe x xa asia water resources xe x xa the one hand and upstream turkey on the other concerns the tigris and euphrates rivers whose headwaters lie in turkey . turkey had already built several dams including the atat xc xbcrk dam on the two rivers and construction has been underway on two more dams on the euphrates at birecik and kargam xc xb xc x f xe x xa additional media index entries more about turkey references found in britannica articles assorted references flag history in flag of turkey art and architecture dance and theatre in islamic arts dance as entertainment embroidery in embroidery islamic architecture in islam architecture music in islamic arts the modern period pottery in pottery turkish commerce industry and mining emery production in emery mohair fibre production in mohair customs and traditions dress in dress the ottoman empire gregorian and muslim calendar in calendar the muslim calendar view more additional reading external websites central intelligence agency the world factbook turkey maps of world turkey europe lonely planet turkey national geographic kids turkey britannica websites articles from britannica encyclopedias for elementary and high school students. turkey children s encyclopedia ages turkey student encyclopedia ages and up article history article contributors feedback corrections updates help us improve this article contact our editors with your feedback. turkey flag of turkey national anthem of turkey official name t xc xbcrkiye cumhuriyeti republic of turkey form of government multiparty republic with one legislative house grand national assembly of turkey head of state and government president recep tayyip erdo xc x fan capital ankara official language turkish official religion none monetary unit turkish lira tl currency exchange rate usd equals . turkish lira population est. population rank population projection total area sq mi total area sq km density persons per sq mi . density persons per sq km . urban rural population urban . rural . life expectancy at birth male xe x x . years female xe x x . years literacy percentage of population age and over literate male female . gni u.s. xe x x gni per capita u.s. amendments to the constitution passed in april and implemented in july expanded the grand national assembly from to seats eliminated the post of prime minister and expanded the role of the president. related people constantine vii porphyrogenitus tansu xc x iller xc xb smet xc xb n xc xb n xc xbc xc x e xc xbckr xc xbc saraco xc x flu enver pa xc x fa st. john chrysostom ziya g xc xb kalp alexius i comnenus theodore metochites epictetus ad related places kars giresun bursa xc xb skenderun k xc xb r xc xb kkale xc x eanl xc xb urfa k xc xbctahya eski xc x fehir xc x orum kayseri ad related topics ataturk dam council of constantinople battle of granicus group of iran in a country at a crossroads jel xc x l xc xab revolts treaty of ankara battle of poson council of nicaea erci xc x f van earthquake of ad featured on britannica demystified society what is gaslighting list technology influential computer programming languages quiz literature language writers of the harlem renaissance spotlight science the fermi paradox where are all the aliens introduction quick facts land relief the northern folded zone the southern folded zone the central massif the arabian platform drainage rivers lakes soils climate overview climatic regions plant and animal life vegetation fauna settlement patterns people language and religion demographic trends economy resources agriculture industry trade transportation administration and social conditions government constitution political parties foreign policy education health and welfare education health and welfare cultural life daily life work dress religious practice social roles and kinship male and female roles marriage and family life social change arts and media sports and recreation history mustafa kemal and the turkish war of independence xe x x the fundamental law and abolition of the sultanate declaration of the turkish republic turkey under mustafa kemal government opposition kemalist policies turkey after kemal xe x x catat xc xbcrk xe x x d world war ii and the postwar era xe x x turkey under the democrats xe x x the economy political repressions the military coup of the national unity committee the constitution of the ascendancy of the right xe x x political developments s to xe x x s military intervention and coalition governments the s the constitution the kurdish conflict the s challenges of the st century turkey under the akp negotiations with the pkk foreign affairs since edit mode turkey tips for editing leave edit mode submit tips for editing we welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. you can make it easier for us to review and hopefully publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. encyclop xc xa dia britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. you may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. any text you add should be original not copied from other sources. at the bottom of the article feel free to list any sources that support your changes so that we can fully understand their context. internet urls are the best. your contribution may be further edited by our staff and its publication is subject to our final approval. unfortunately our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. submit thank you for your contribution our editors will review what you ve submitted and if it meets our criteria we ll add it to the article. please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. uh oh there was a problem with your submission. please try again later. close keep exploring britannica russian empire russian empire historical empire founded on november october old style when the russian xe x xa read this article scott morrison scott morrison australian conservative politician who became leader of the liberal party and prime minister xe x xa read this article china china country of east asia. it is the largest of all asian countries and has the largest population xe x xa read this article view more stay connected facebook twitter youtube instagram pinterest newsletters about us about our ads partner program contact us privacy policy terms of use xc xa encyclop xc xa dia britannica inc. menu home spotlight demystified quizzes galleries lists on this day biographies login join contents contents page of turkey view all media images videos and audio media print print please select which sections you would like to print table of contents cite share share facebook twitter google linkedin email feedback feedback corrections updates omissions let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article requires login . select feedback type select a type required factual correction spelling grammar correction link correction additional information other submit feedback if you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article you can go to edit mode requires login . thank you for your feedback our editors will review what you xe x x ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. join britannica s publishing partner program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work share share share facebook twitter google linkedin email search email this page email to email from subject comments cancel send xc x close download our free chrome extension britannica insights . facts matter and britannica insights makes it easier to find them. install for chrome now learn more